

VOYAGES & DISCOVERIES IN S. AMERICA

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS.
Chap. F221
No. V97
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.





A JOURNAL OF THE TRAVELS OF JOHN GRILLET, AND FRANCIS BECHAMEL INTO GUIANA, In the Year, 1674. IN Order to Discover the Great Lake of PARIMA, and the many Cities said to be situated on its Banks, and reputed the Richest in the WORLD. LONDON: Printed for Samuel Buckley. 1698.



Reverend Father,
THE Discovery that I and Father Bechamel, have made of divers Savage Nations on the Continent of Guiana, near the Island of Cayenne, obliges me to draw up a brief Relation of our Voyage, and to present it to your Reverence, that you may know what Employment we may have here, and how many Missionaries may find a fit Occasion for the Exercise of their Zeal. If I had had some Companions whom I might have left with the Nouragues and the Acoquas, I should have pierc’d much farther into the Country; but the Nouragues who were our Guides, not daring to advance farther into the Country of the Acoquas, to retain the good will of ‘em both, we should have left a Missionary in each of these Nations, that the Acoquas might have conducted us to their Friends, who (as far as I can conjecture) reach quite to the Equinoctial Line. We might also have pass’d to the West of the River Maroni, and have enter’d into an Alliance with the Nations that extend to the River of Surinam, upon which the Dutch have planted (1) a Colony:

lony: but since we have confin'd our selves to those Countries that are from Three Degrees of Northern Latitude to the Equinoctial Line, we need not be afraid that the People of any European Nation will trouble us in our Missions; because there's no gain to be made by 'em; besides, that we run the risque of being Massacred by the Natives. 'Tis from your Reverence that we expect Support and Assistance so far as you are capable, and shall think convenient in sending us Missionaries of a Vigorous Constitution, of great Vertue, and of a Disposition ready to suffer hardships; because in these parts there can little or no Accommodations be brought to relieve them in case of Sickness; for the less one carries thither so much the better; besides that the Ignorance and Barbarity of those People always give a Missionary just occasion to fear, that they take up mischievous Resolutions against him at the very first shadow of dissatisfaction they receive. I expect here a good number of Missionaries to dispose up and down this vast Country; and I hope your Reverence will not refuse this Request; which obliges me particularly to recommend my self to your good Prayers, who am

Reverend Father,
Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant in our Lord, John Grillet, of the Society of JESUS.

THE Reverend Father Francis Mercier having been sent from France, in Quality of Visitor of the Missions of our Society, both in the Islands, and Continent of the Southern America, by the Reverend Father, John Pinet, Provincial of the Jesuits in France; with the Reverend Father Gerard Brion, Superior-General of the said Missions, and Father Mace, and Father Alarole; he arriv’d in the Island of Cayenne the 21st of December, 1673. and parted thence Ten Days after: During his Stay there, he regulated divers Affairs, as well Temporal as Spiritual; and among other Things, finding we had yet no Knowledge of any other People, but the Galibis, and Aracarers, our Neighbours, who dwell near the Sea, and among whom

the Fathers of our Society employ'd their Talents, with abundance of Zeal; he resolv'd to attempt a Discovery of those Nations that lie remote from the Sea. It was my Happiness to be chosen for so pious a Work; and I was particularly instructed by my Orders, to discover the Acouquas, a very populous Nation, according to the Report, some Nouragues, who frequent the Galibis, gave us; withal, telling us, they were a Warlike People, and us'd to eat Men. One of these Nouragues being ask'd, Two Months before the Arrival of the Reverend Father-Visitor, If it were true, that the Acouquas us'd to eat their Enemies, answer'd, That he came from 'em Four Months ago, and then they had just made an end of boiling in their Pots, and eating a Nation, which they had destroy'd. I desir'd the Reverend Father, Francis Bechamel, for my Comrade, who has a great Deal of Zeal for these Missions, and has an extraordinary Faculty of learning strange Languages; besides that, he already understood the Tongue of the Galibis, which many of the Nouragues also speak; some of whom we were oblig'd to take for our Guides, to conduct us to the Acouquas; for we yet know no other Way to come at 'em, but through the Country of the Nouragues: And Father Bechamel took care to provide some Galibis,

Galibis, to conduct us to the Nouragues, who dwell above the Source of the River (2) Uvia, and to buy some Cassave and Paste of (3) Ovicou for his Voyage, which we counted would be for about Ten Days.
This Father having provided all Necessaries; namely, Three Galibis, some Cassave, and Paste of Ovicou, in hopes of finding by the good Providence of God, either Fish, or Venison, with the Assistance of our Indians, we left the Port of Cayenne the 25th of January, taking our Leave of the Reverend Father Brion, Superior-General, and Father Mace, and Father Bechet; but particularly of the (4) Chevalier de Lexy, our Governour, who did us the Honour to conduct us together, with the Fathers of our Society, quite to the Canoo, in which we embark'd in the Afternoon, having our Fisherman to steer the Canoo, and Three Indian Galibis to row with our Two Servants. All of us were of Opinion, That our Canoo was too small, and indeed it would have prov'd so, if we had embarked at the coming up of the Tide, for at that time the Waves are very rough near the Shoar; but we avoided this Danger by embarking a little before the Tide came up; so that we were out of all danger when the Tide began to drive us into the River, which gives its Name to this Island; be-

sides, our Cano being very light, and not easie to be turn’d, was very fit to get clear of several little Falls that are in the River Uvia, which we were to pass almost quite through, till we came to the Entrance of a lesser River, that let us into the Country of the Nouragues, the first Nation that we were willing to be acquainted with, that by their Means we might find a Passage to the Acoquas. Our Way was between the Island of Cayenne, and the main Land; and in the Evening we arriv’d at the House of one Deslauriers, that had settled himself there; we continued with him for a certain Reason, all the next Day, being the 26th of January. Since God was pleas’d to protect and lead us by the Hand, as it were in all this Voyage; we must confess, that it was he who inspir’d us with the Resolution to begin it by the River Uvia; for we knew but two Ways of entering into the Country of the Nouragues, one by the River Uvia, and t’other by the River (5) Aproague; this last is very difficult, because the Falls of the Water are so great, that the Sapayes, and Galibis, that live at the Mouth of this River, require a very large Reward to perform this Voyage; and indeed, are the more unwilling to undertake it, because they are afraid of those Nouragues, that eat Humane Flesh: So, that when any of ’em

go into those Parts, they stay there as little time as they can: Therefore it is scarce possible to go this Way, and if we had gone it, we should have been altogether unacquainted with those Indians, that dwell on the Coasts of the River Uvia, and with the Nouragues that dwell above the Source of it. But without knowing any thing of this before, we chose to pass into the Country of the Nouragues, by the Uvia, and have this Way visited that whole Nation.
The 27th of January we left the Sieur Deslauriers somewhat late, and therefore proceeded but a little way that Day: Our Galibis brought us into a Hut of the (6) Maprouanes, as well to shelter us from a great Shower of Rain, as to lodge us (7) there that Night. These Maprouanes are about Thirty in Number, who retir’d from their Country, near the River of Amazons, to avoid the Persecution of the Portuguese, and of those Indians call’d the (8) Arianes, who have almost extirpated that Nation: We found nothing there but Cassave and Ovicou; and to the 6th of February, we had nothing but Cassave, besides Two Fishes, and a Couple of Fowls, which the Galibis took, (which serv’d us for Four small Meals) and a little Piece of Fish we met with at another Indian Cottage.

The 28th we arriv’d at a Mountain, where a certain Galibi, nam’d Maure, dwells; this is Twelve Leagues from the Mouth of the Uvia: And Two Leagues below this Mountain, the Land upon the River, which is hitherto very low, and almost always overflow’d, is a high, fine Country, as far as the Dwelling of the first Nouragues.
The 29th we lay in a Wood, and so we did on the 30th, having pass’d by a Village of the Galibi’s, which contain’d but very few People, to make the bigger Day’s Journey.
The 31st we lodg’d in a Galibi’s Cottage, whose Family consisted of about Six or Seven, but Three or Four of ’em were absent.
The First of February we pass’d the Night in the Woods, and on the Second we lay at a Galibi’s Cottage again; and this was the poorest, and most pitiful Hut that ever I saw among the Indians of this Country; there was in it only one Man, and his Wife and Children, who had nothing at all that Day to sup on. One of their Children was much swell’d, and in a languishing Condition, with a continual Fever, of which we thought it could never recover; therefore Father Bechamel baptiz’d it; and the Consolation this gave us sweeten’d all our past Hardships.

The Third we went ashore in the Country of the Nouragues, after having this Day, and the Day before pass'd Three Falls in the River Uvia, and another in the River of the Nouragues; but this was nothing in comparison of the Falls of Water we were to pass on the Rivers of Aproague and Camopi.

And it was now time to land, for our (9) Cassave would have been spent if we had had but a little farther to go in those great Desarts, and vast Forests, that are all along upon this River; upon which there are no other Cottages but those I have been speaking of, and those of some Galibis and Areacarets, who live towards the Mouth of it, and are in all about a Hundred or Sixscore Persons. This River winds very much, and runs a Course of near Fifty Leagues.

Our Galibis serv'd us in this Voyage with a great deal of Respect, and gave us Access to the Chief of these first Nouragues, to whom we presented a Hatchet, to engage him to enter into an Alliance with us; they did not remember, that they had seen above One French Man before in their Country; so that the Women and Girls, who had never travell'd into the Country of the Galibis, were mightily amaz'd at the Sight of us. If one might judge of the whole Na-

tion by these People, one might very well say, the Nouragues are a very courteous and affable People. Some of 'em could speak the Language of the Galibis very well, and serv'd for our Interpreters. They did all they could to seek Provision, to treat us well; but being unsuccessful in their Hunting, we had only Cassave, and a little Meat at one of our Repasts, but with great Demonstrations of their Kindness. We bought Cassave of 'em for the Supply of the Men that belong to our Canoo's; and on the Sixth of February, after the Galibis had been treated with a small Feast after the Fashion of the Country, they parted from us at about Ten a Clock in the Morning.
We also left this first Cottage of the Nouragues, on the Seventh of February, to go a Journey of Four and Twenty Leagues by Land, over very rugged Mountains; but went only half a League from thence to lodge that Night, being attended with Two young Nouragues, each of about Sixteen or Seventeen Years of Age, who were to carry our Baggage; here we were to take another Man, who had promis'd to carry our Provision for us, which consisted of Cassave, and Paste of Ouicon: This Man's Wife, in this Second Hut, was ill of a Cancer in her Breast, which so tormented her, and had so exceedingly wasted her, that

seeing her under so terrible a Distemper, without the Help of any Medicine, we suppos'd she could not recover, and that in Probability, she would live morally the rest of her Days; for these People endure their Pains and Hardships very patiently, as we observ'd in all the Galibis; therefore we resolv'd to baptize her: In order to this, Father Bechamel took care to instruct her, having already made some Improvement in the Language of this People, and had likewise the Assistance of one of our young Nouragues, who understood the Galibis Tongue. This poor sick Woman receiv'd his Instructions very well, and was baptized, which was an occasion of great Comfort to us.

The Eighth, having Bread and Paste of Ovicou enough to serve us Four Days, we set forward with our Three Nouragues, to perform our Journey of Four and Twenty Leagues, over Mountains all the way, which the Nouragues sometimes perform in a Day and a half; but ordinarily in Two or Three Days, when they have Women in their Company. One of our French Men of Cayenne, that came thence on the 27th of January, follow'd us closely with Seven Galibis, and overtook us where we lodg'd the Second Night, who gave me a Letter from the Reverend Father Brion, our Superior

perion written the day he came away, which gave us no small joy, for it contain’d a great deal of Good Advice, that might be serviceable to us in our Expedition.

This French-Man was much fatigu’d with his Journey, and sent his Indians before him the day following, who in that one day being the Tenth of February, went as much ground as we could do in a day and a half, by reason of the difficulty of the ways. He having joyn’d himself to our Company, and comparing our Nouragues with his Galibis, found a great alteration, and could not but admire the Meekness and Patience of these Three Indians, but especially their Respect. They carry’d our Provisions, yet they durst not take any without asking, tho’ we had often told ’em that they might take of ’em when they pleas’d. This day we passed the River Aratay, which throws itself into the Aproague. The Aratay is a fine River, which comes from a Country that is Situate between the Source of the River Uvia and the County of the Merciou, which the Nouragues say is a space of Land that extends about Seven days Journey. We were forc’d to pass this River Aratay which is pretty wide and deep, and the Stream of which is somewhat Rapid, in a little Canoo, in much danger of being cast away, as this French-

French-Man that joyn’d us happen’d to be, when he repass’d it in his return, where he lost what he carry’d with him; which was all he had in the World. After this we lodg’d a third time in the Woods, and on the Eleventh of February, being very weary we about Noon Arriv’d at the Cottage of Imanon the Nourague a Famous (10) Piaye (or Physician) in all that Country, where we found the Galibis that had advanc’d before us the preceding day. These Galibis mutinied against this poor French-Man, and probably were the occasion of hindring the Nouragues of that place from selling any thing to him; so that he lost his Journey. Nay he was oblig’d to entreat one of our Nourague Guides to carry part of his Iron Wares, which he brought to trade with, because these Galibis refus’d to help him. And there was no remedy for it but Patience, since he was 80 Leagues from Cayenne, in a Nation that had no Commerce with the French.

We did not part with our Three Guides without regret; but we could not detain em, because they were oblig’d to return for several good Reasons. The Principal of ’em whose Name was Paratou, told us, for our comfort, that in the place where we now were, which they call Caraoribo, from the Name of a little River that passes by it,

we should find a great many Paratous, he meant a great many Nouragues, as good humor'd as himself. But we found a great deal of difference in the Temper of those Guides we had from Carooribo to the Acoquas, and of those we had before.
As soon as these had left us, we enter'd into a good Correspondence with the Chief Camiati the Father of Imanon, by presenting him with a Hatchet; this is a very Famous Chief, and the Principal one the Nouragues have, and the next to him in Eminence, is the Chief of the Nouragues of Uvia. This Camiati the day after our Arrival came to his Son's Cottage, (for his own is upon the River Aproague) he may be about 60 Years of Age, and seems to be still very Vigorous: His Countenance tho' lean has a Warlike Mien, but withal he has a Savage Aspect; his Humour is but very indifferent toward Strangers, tho' mild enough toward his own People, to whom according to the Fashion of the Country, he every day gives the Good-morrow, and the Good-night, from the Oldest People to Children of Fifteen Years of Age. He promis'd us to conduct us quite to the Acquas, when his Canoo was made, to whose Country he pretended he would go himself, and desir'd but the space of Ten Days to finish this Canoo; now tho' we knew well enough after what maner

ner the Indians us'd to reckon, who are often Three Months in doing what they might perform in the space of Ten Days: we resolv'd however to continue with him to have the advantage of being under his Protection; and to perswade him, if we should find him make too long a delay, to borrow another Canoo, that was at Five Days Journv distance from us; and in the mean time to acquaint our selves with the Language of the Nouragues as much as we could, which (as we were told) differ'd but little from that of the Acouas and Merciou. The Language of the Galibis, which some of us understood, and which was very Familiar to Father Bechamel was some help to us on this Occasion. This Nouragues Tongue is not of an easie and soft Pronunciation like that of the Galibis, but has a great number of Words that must be pronounc'd with very rough Aspirations, others of 'em can't be pronounc'd without shutting the Teeth; at another time one must speak through the Nose; and sometimes these Three difficulties all occur in the same Word.
Father Bechamel immediately began to apply himself to the study of this Language; and I made so much advantage of his Labour in which he succeeded to admiration, that by means of the Galibis Language I made a small Discourse of the Cre-

ation of the World; to make these People know something of their Creator. Imanon the Master of this Hut was the first that took delight in hearing this Discourse, and after him the Chief himself; and Five or Six others, as they were working would repeat in that very indistinct Galibis I could speak, these Words; God made the Heavens, God made the Earth, &c. Here were many Men that had each of 'em Two Wives, and one of 'em who had Three; this did not hinder me from telling 'em in the Account I gave 'em of the Creation of Mankind; that God made but one Woman for the First Man, and that he did not allow one Man to have Two Wives. And tho' all these Nouragues perceiv'd we condemn'd their Custom of taking Two or Three Wives at a time, yet they said not a word against the Christian Law for not indulging the same Liberty.
Seeing these People so docile and pliable, I was willing to try if the Songs of the Church would please 'em, and accordingly I sang the Magnificat in the first Tune, Father Bechamel and our Two Servants joyning in with me. This was so grateful to 'em, that afterwards we ordinarily sang some Hymns three-times a day to their great satisfaction. Nay some of 'em learn'd to answer to the Litanies of the Blessed Virgin,

gin, which we sang every Evening. In the mean while our Chief's Canoo went forward but very (11) slowly, and we thought we had much better endeavour to prevail with him to borrow another, with which he comply'd, and sent Two of his Men for this end Five Days Journey from his House, to get a convenient one for us.
It was the Twenty eighth of February, when these Men parted from us, and seeing him the next day which was the First of March dispatch away another Company of his Men, we thought convenient to make use of this occasion to engage some of 'em to carry our Baggage, whom Father Bechamel accompany'd, together with one of our Servants, while I and our other Servant remain'd with the Chief, that we might give him no offence; because we stood in need of his Protection.
After I had continu'd a Fortnight with him, making all the Children say their Prayers Morning and Evening, and repeating my little Instructions to the greatest part of those I was acquainted with, but especially to Three Young Men who were well Marry'd, confirming 'em in the Resolution they had made never to take a Second Wife; of which promise they seem'd to make no difficulty. I set forward the

Fifteenth of March, to seek Father Bechamel, and to wait for the Chief of the Cottage, who was to go by Water Five days after with his Canoo; I had but Three Leagues to go by Land, whereas it was near Fifteen by Water. From that time I found the People still more teachable, and when the Captain return'd, among Four and twenty Persons, there were not above Three, but signified they took a great deal of pleasure in my Instructions. During our stay here, a Serpent came in the Night in the place where we lay, and bit a Hound, so that he died in 30 Hours after. This Accident was Injurious to us, because the Chief, and the Owner of the Dog attributed it to the Prayers which we sang; so that I durst not Sing any more, but contented my self to make every body in the Cottage say their Prayers, except three (as I said before) namely the Chief Camiati and Two other Old Men.
The Ninth of April, after I had much importun'd the Chief, that we might set forward; he told us, he was not willing to make this Voyage, and that all his Men should go to set us in our way, and should leave us when we went ashore to go by Land to the Rivers that lead to the Acouguas, whether Four of the Company should attend us. We understood that their Voy-

age was determin’d without any regard to us; however we did not scruple to pay ’em for it, being willing to make use of this Opportunity, because it was no easie matter to meet with another. However I oppos’d the Design of having so many Men go with us, because the Two Canoos they had were too small for such a Company: This was a great difficulty with us, and was not resolv’d till the next day, when we represented to the Chief, that we would leave him our little Chest, that we would take very few of our (12) things out of it for our Voyage, that when we return’d I would continue with him; that if he was not pleas’d to assist us in our Voyage, I must return to Cayenne, that then he must never expect to see any of us again, and would have no more of our Commodities; this made him resolve to lessen the number of his Men.
The Tenth of March we parted, being Sixteen in Number, of which the Chief would needs be one for Three days, that he might bring back his Canoo. In the Evening we went ashore into the Woods; and on the Eleventh, after we had pass’d several Falls of Waters in the way we made the Two days, we Arriv’d at a Cottage of the Noiragues, Ten Leagues from the former; here we were well receiv’d, and went

forward the Third day with a Third Canoo which was very small; it carry'd only Two Men, a Woman, and a Girl of Ten or Twelve Years Old. We passed Two Falls that were difficult enough, and Arriv'd at a Third, which the Canoo could not pass, which has oblig'd the Nouragues to make a way to draw their Canoos by Land almost half a League, this fall is at Two Degrees, and Forty Six Minutes of Northern Latitude. The Indians drew only the little Canoo by Land; for the Chief left us and return'd back with the Two others; and we who were then Fifteen in Number went to Embark in a great Canoo, that was above the Water-fall, which the Two Persons that were sent by Camiati had borrow'd; Four Leagues higher, we found the Mouth of the River Tenaporibo: and went to lie in a Cottage hard by, which was yet upon the River Aproague, where we found Five Nourague Travellers, who were going to the Country of the Merciou; besides whom there was a Woman who had a little Girl of Seven or Eight Months Old that was very ill. Imanon (of whom I have spoken) was now the Chief of our Company; he is the greatest Physician (that is the greatest Juggler) of the Country: who tho' he is a great Hypocrite, and very much for plurality of Wives; yet did not scruple to ac-

quaint us, that this Child was very Sick; when we had examin'd the matter we judg'd it necessary to Baptize her, which Father Bechamel did, at the time when these Travellers parted from us. I had before Baptiz'd a little Girl in the Cottage of this Imamon immediately after it was born, because the Mother of it when she brought it into the World had left it in the (13) Dirt, from whence they would not take it up for a long time, being told of this disorder, and finding they would put nothing under the Infant to keep it from the coldness of the Mud, and of the Night I baptiz'd it.
The Fourteenth we left this Hutt, and presently enter'd into the River of Tenaporibo, which is very deep and rapid, tho' it winds much; we were not the First French-Men that had been upon this River; and we have been inform'd that Three English-Men were kill'd and Eaten there (14) some Years ago by the Nouragues: 'Tis very difficult to Navigate this River, meerly because of its narrowness, and because the great Trees upon the Banks of it when they fall, often extend their Branches to the other side, so that one must either pass over or under these Trees, which is not done without a great deal of difficulty. We lay one Night in the Woods, and on the Fifteenth Arriv'd at a Hutt where we conti

We left this Hut, on the Twenty Seventh of April, towards Evening, to go and seek our Guides, who were not far off, with whom we advanc’d by Land, and went only Five Leagues among very difficult Mountains.
The Twenty Ninth we travell’d about Ten Leagues, in a Way a little more pleasant, and lay in the Woods as we had

done the Night before. Our Three Guides shew'd us Two Rivulets, which they said were Tenaporibo and Camopi, that were very rapid; and Five or Six Leagues beyond, Tenaporibo is Forty Foot broad, and full Twelve in depth: And at Fifteen Leagues distance, or a little more, the River Camopi is as big as the Sein is below Paris, from whence one may conjecture what Compass it takes in its course.

The Thirtieth we went to lodge upon the River Eriski, from whence Two of our Nouragues, went to the Nouragues of the River Inipi, to borrow a Canoo, and so to come again at us, where we lodg'd; for the River Eriski runs into the Inipi. This they did for our Ease, our Journey having been very hard, considering our Weakness.

The First of May they came to us again, with a pretty handsome Canoo, wherein there were Three Nouragues, that never had seen a French Man, or any other European, in their Lives. Their Aspect was very sweet, and they seem'd to be of a very tractable Disposition; when they had seen us they returned Home, and we embarked in this Canoo, a little after Noon, and came to lodge in the Woods, upon the River Inipi, where our Guides (15) mended the Canoo; and the next Day, being the Second of May, having gone down this River,

which has a very rapid Stream, about Ten Leagues, we enter'd into the River Camopi, in which we we went Four Leagues more, and that againt the Stream: For Inipi loses its Name, and with Camopi makes a great River, which goes and joyns it self to the River (16) Yapoque, Five Days Voyage from thence. Camopi is very swift, and has so many difficult Falls, that 'tis no easie Matter to number them; we went up this River the Third and Fourth of May, with a great deal of Difficulty and Danger. The Fourth of May we lay upon a flat Rock, where we found a Piece of a Mind Cottage, the Covering of which our Men mended with Boughs: That Day we pass'd through a perilous Place, not only because of a dangerous Fall of Water; but likewise, because it was commanded by a Cottage of Nouragues, which is the Last of that Nation, the Master of it is a Morou, the Name of an Indian Nation, one of whom was hang'd at Cayenne, above a Year ago, for killing a French Man: We had Reason to fear, that he would, after the Manner of the Indians, revenge this Man's Death upon us; but one of our Guides, who was also a Morou, had married his Daughter, and we hop'd the Presence of this young Man, whom we then took to be a Nourague, would divert his ill Humour;

as indeed it happen'd: And after we were got aboard upon our flat Rock, which is in the Country of the Acouquas, we were greatly comforted to see our Three Guides ask for their Supper by the Sign of the Cross, where no Person had ever done it before; and that, without having any need to be put in mind of it. But that which still increas'd our Joy, was, that the youngest of our Guides, who might be about Seventeen Years of Age, after Supper, of his own accord, sang in the Tune of the Church, Sancta Maria, Ora pro nobis; having been yet taught no more than that. I continued the Litanies, and he answer'd me. Towards Evening our principal Guide gave a Signal, with a sort of a Pipe, that may be heard at a great Distance. The next Day, being the Fifth of May, we had a very rainy Morning, which hinder'd us from going forward; but notwithstanding the Rain about Nine a Clock in the Morning, we saw three young Acouquas, who were sent to know who we were, we went with them towards Noon, and about Three a Clock arriv'd soon after them, at the first Hut of the Acouquas; which is at Two Degrees, and Twenty Five Minutes of Northern Latitude. They were mightily pleas'd to see us; for in all appearance, they had some considerable time before heard of our Voyage.

Voyage. They so familiarly acquainted themselves with us, that in Three Days time, there was not one of them that refus'd to pray to God; and we every Day put 'em upon saying their Prayers Morning and Evening. The Second Day our first Guide brought us to two other Cottages not far off; where we were entertain'd with as much Kindness, as Strangers could desire of a Savage People: Immediately, those that liv'd about a Day's Journey more remote receiv'd the News of our Arrival, and came to see us. They all admir'd our Hats, our Cassocks, our Shooes, a Gun; which we made our first Guide discharge from time to time, in great Companies of 'em; the Pictures of our Breviaries, our Writing, and the Songs of the Church, which they desir'd to hear a great many times in a Day. They heard our Instructions with Attention; and seem'd to have very good Sentiments, and to be much affected, when we told 'em, that formerly the People of our Country were ignorant of God, and that some good People came into our Nation, who taught us, that there was a God, who would make us happy for ever in Heaven; and what we were to do, that we might go to that blessed Place: That we were come to do them the same good Office, that they might go to Heaven as well as we.

That which gives me good Hopes of the Conversion of this Nation, is, that they heard those Commands of God with Reverence, which are most opposite to their ancient Manner of living. And this gives me occasion to speak more distinctly of what I have remark’d in these Two Nations.

The Nouragues and the Acouquas, in Matter of Religion, are the same with the Galibis. They acknowledge there is a God, but don’t worship him. They say he dwells in Heaven, without knowing whether he is a Spirit or no, but rather seem to believe he has a Body. The Galibis call God (17) Tamoucicabo; that is as much as to say, the Ancient of Heaven. The Nouragues and the Acouquas call him Maire, and never talk of him but in fabulous Stories: They have a great many Superstitions, which are only like the idle Tales and Fooleries of Children, in which I never observ’d ’em practise any Idolatry: But I am very much afraid their Physicians, by their juggling Tricks, debauch the Women and Maids; for they have given me great Reason to think so.

The natural Disposition of the Nouragues and Acouquas is mild; but the more remote from the Sea the Nouragues live, the more tractable you’ll find ’em; for the frequent Concoursé they have with the Indians, on

the Sea-Coasts, renders 'em more uncontroulable and difficult to be treated with. 'Tis certain, the Acouas are quite another sort of People, than the French at Cayenne imagine 'em to be, who account 'em fierce, cruel, treacherous and perfidious, to those they entertain; For if one may judge of that Nation, by near Two Hundred of 'em, whom we have seen, they are an honest, affable, pleasant People, and are very attentive and ready to receive what is said to 'em. 'Tis true, they not long since exterminated a small Nation, and eat several of them; but I attribute this Barbarity to the ill Custom of the Country, rather than to the Disposition of the People; and this seems the more probable, because being inform'd Two or Three Days after our arrival, that there was half a Day's Journey from us, some of the Flesh of a Magapa (the Name of a People that are their Enemies) whom they had newly kill'd with another, while they were watching their opportunity to surprize one or other of the Acouas alone; and besides, one of the People of the Cottage having set before us the Jaw of a young Man; we told 'em, This was not well done, and that God forbids us to kill an Enemy, when we take him Prisoner, and to eat him afterwards. At this they look'd down very much without giving

one Word of a Reply. Another time, the Master of one of the Cottages having heard, that the Galibis to hinder us from undertaking this Voyage, had threaten’d us, that we should be roasted by the Acouas, was fill’d with great Indignation at it, and could not be pacified till I told him, I took those Galibis for Lyars and Fools: Having moreover, told ’em, I had been made Prisoner of War by the English, and restor’d to the French, without receiving any harm; and that God would not allow us to kill those we took in War; they seem’d pretty well to approve of this Law. And tho’ this barbarous Custom is a Point so much establish’d and receiv’d in all Times among the Acouas, and among the Nouragues too; yet it seems, by what I have been relating, to be no difficult Matter to restrain ’em from this Savage Practice, of killing and eating their Enemies.

Polygamy is a Second Obstacle which we found against the Christian Religion among these Two Nations of the Nouragues, and Acouas; for where there’s one Man to be found, that has but one Wife, there are six, who have each of ’em two or three. The Hope that may be conceiv’d for the eradicating of this Vice, is, not concerning Persons that are already pre-ingag’d in this evil Custom, but only those that

that have yet but one Wife, and young Men that are not yet married, who might be perswaded to be content with one Wife. I confess, there's no hope of working upon the others.
The Way of Living among the People of these Two Nations, is very agreeable, and has something more courteous in it, than that of the Galibis. For Instance, Among the Galibis, those that are married, dine every one apart, and those that are unmarried eat all together; and all the Women, Maids and little Children, go to another side of the Hut to eat. The Nouragues and Acouas do quite otherwise, for the Husband eats with his Wife, or Wives and Children with admirable Agreement and Union. They don't drink (19) much, but are great eaters; and are always Fishing or Hunting, in which they spare no Pains, to get their Living. They are all Lyars, as well as all other Indians, that we know. And when they perceive their Lyes are discover'd, they retire, seeming to be a little asham'd, but will not fail to frame a Lye again on the next Occasion. The Nouragues endeavour'd to fright us with a great many Stories of their own Invention, to make us alter our Resolution of going to the Acouas, that we might spend all our Stock of Goods with them; sometimes telling us,

they had seen the Track of some strange wild Beast; sometimes that the Caranes, their Enemies, were running up and down their Woods, and that they had observ’d the Steps of Three of that Nation not far from their Hut: But when they saw they could not terrifie us, they did what we would have ’em. This Vice induces ’em to promise much, and to perform but little; which also is occasion’d by the little Judgment they have, to esteem any thing according to the Value and Importance of it; for this makes ’em not matter what Injury they do any one, in breaking their Word; nor how much they dishonour themselves in so doing. To have a thorough Conception, how common this is in these Two Nations (which is also rife among all the Indian Nations we are acquainted with) one must compare ’em to little Children, who esteem what they see only by Fancy: They are also subject to Steal; so that sometimes they must be narrowly watch’d, or else they will be pilfering one thing or other.

The Nouragues make about Six or Seven Hundred Persons, the Merciouxs, who dwell on the West-side of ’em, are equal to ’em in Number; the Acouquas are South of ’em, and conceal’d from us the Strength of their Nation; however, I suppose it may be three

or four times stronger than that of the Nouragues; for having ask'd an old Woman, how many Cottages there were on one side, to which we pointed; she told us, there were Ten; then pointing toward the Quarter, where their Chief dwelt, she took a (20) Handful of her Hair, to signifie to us, the great Number of Cottages there were on that side. Between the Acouqas, and the Mericous, they told us, there was the Nation of the Pirios, which the Acouqas say, are equal to themselves in Strength: On the East and South-East-side are the Pirionaus, and on the East the Pirios and Magapas, and in the midst of all these Nations the Morous, who are very barbarous. These Nations all speak one and the same Language, and are understood by the Caranes, who are the Enemies of the Nouragues. They also say, the Maranes, who are a very great People, understand the same Tongue: On the South South-West of the Acouqas are the Aramifas, whose Language borders on that of the Galibis, having a great many of the same Words in it, tho' they are unacquainted with that Nation. The Acouqas say, these Aramifas are a very great Nation. If there be a Lake of Parima, these People can't be Forty Leagues distant from it on the North-side: We could get no Account of this Lake.

There was not one Indian, who when we enquir’d of them, whether they did not know of a vast Place of Water like the Sea, the Sand of which is Caracoli (for so they call Gold, Silver and Copper) could give me the least Intelligence of it. These (21) Aramissas are in the same Longitude, wherein the Maps place the Eastern Part of the Lake of Parima.
After we had been with the Acouquas Twelve or Thirteen Days, the Air grew unwholsome, by an excessive Heat, at a time when there was very little Wind; which seldom fails to blow in those Countries; and indeed, ’tis that that renders ’em habitable. Father Bechamel was taken with a Tertian Ague, and the strongest of our Servants also fell very sick: We therefore press’d our Guides to return, since they were not willing to conduct us any farther, nor suffer the Acouquas to go and fetch their Chief, who dwelt at the Distance of Three Days Journey, from the Place where we were, with whom we would have contracted an Alliance. These Three Guides became insolent, upon the Supposition, that it was to honour them that the Acouquas came in such great Numbers; tho’ in all appearance, it was the Curiosity of seeing us French Men that brought ’em together: They became very troublesome, especially

the Morou, who gave sufficient Indications of his wicked Disposition, perswading the Acouquas, that we ought to leave them all our Wares; these so unreasonable Proposals did not much surprize us; but to give 'em good Hopes of our Return, we left an (22) Iron Tool of Half a Crown Price with one of 'em, who had but one Wife, upon Condition, that I should have a great (23) Hamock when I came again; promising I would then give him a Bill and a Knife, to make up what this wanted of the Value of it. I made choice of this Man on purpose to signifie what respect I had for lawful Marriages; and he understood me very well, and promis'd me, he would not take a Second Wife, during the Life of this he already had, with whom he had liv'd at least Eight or Nine Years, for they had a Daughter about Seven Years old; however, this Project facilitated our Return.
The 25th of May we embark'd on the River Camopi, in Two Canoo's; Father Bechamel was in the least of 'em, with our principal Nourague, and an Acouquas, who had a Mind to go with us to Cayenne; and I went in the other with our Two Servants, the Morou, and the young Nourague, who not taking care to guide the Vessel right, let it run so near the Precipice of a great Fall

Fall of Water, that those in the other Canoo, cry’d out, believing we should be lost: But these Two young Men, with much ado, brought our Canoo under a Rock, that brake the Violence of the Stream, and getting up the Rock, with all their Might, drew the Canoo out of this Danger. ’Tis abundantly more dangerous to go down these Falls, than to get up ’em; because they chose those places where the Water runs less violently to get the Canoo up with main Strength, whereas in going down ’em they take the swiftest Part of the Stream, so that one runs a greater Hazard of one’s Life, than can easily be express’d.
After having pass’d these Dangers, the Second Day after we embark’d, our young Norague, that had never run the like Risque before, said in his own Language, God is good, and is not angry with us. When we came to the Place, where we were to go by Land, betwixt the River Inipi and Tenaporibo, our Guides, who were well loaded with Hamocks, and other things, which they had bought of the Acoquas, were not willing to help us, which yet they would have done, if that Moron had not put ’em out of Humour: They walk’d very fast, as the Indians are wont to do, when they are loaded, and at last left us at Five Leagues distance from Tenaporibo; but

by the Goodness of God we got thro' without losing our Way, by following a Path, in which these Indians had thrown little Boughs, in several places where it was not easie to discern the Track; to signifie which Way they went. When we came within Three quarters of a League of the first Cottages, we heard some Nouragues calling to us, who brought us Cassave and Fish to eat, and some Ovicou to drink.

The First Day of June our young Morou, being drunk, treated us very ill, which made us resolve to return to Cayenne in another Canoo, and in the Company of other Indians, and the rather because our Distempers increas'd upon us. I had a violent Fever, and a great Cough, and Father Bechamel was very ill, as well as the lustiest of our Servants. And now as we had need of the special Assistance of Providence, to find a Conveniency for our Return; so it pleas'd God to manifest to us, how particular a Care he took of our Preservation, in furnishing us with what we needed; not indeed, at the Time we wish'd, nor after that Manner we thought best, but in such a Season, and in such a Way, as was most convenient for us, 'till at length we arriv'd at Cayenne.

The Second Day of June we made an Agreement with the first Nourague, who had

done us some Service at Caraotibo, Three Leagues from Aproague, who was of a very good Temper, and was come thither with two other Nouragues of the same Place, who had a Kindness for us, and were willing to return Home as soon as they could. We determin'd to set forward the next Day, to prevent our Morou, and our other Guides, who were elsewhere, from opposing our Design. We were to go three Leagues by Land, or Seven by Water, to get to this Man's Canoo; but I was so ill, I could not go by Land, and our Servant was as bad as I, so that we were forc'd to seek a Canoo, to go by Water, the Providence God provided us a little One, which we hired, that was sunk in the Water, but was big enough to carry Four of us; namely, the Indian and his Wife, our Servant and myself. Father Bechamel, tho' very weak, had the Courage to undertake the Journey on Foot, with our other Servant. We were desirous to have gone forward the next Day, from the Place where this Nourague's Canoo lay; but we should not have been able to have undergone this Fatigue: It pleas'd God to provide for our Welfare, on this occasion, in permitting the Indians to detain us Eleven Days in this Place, where there were near Sixty Persons: The Chief of whom, who had a Son in the Neighbourhood of Cayenne,

plac'd us in a Cottage by our selves, that we might not be disturb'd, with the Noise of a great Merry-meeting they were going to have, and order'd his Wife to treat us the best she could: This was partly from his good Humour, and partly to secure his Son from receiving any ill Treatment from the French at Cayenne. God was pleas'd, during our stay here, to give us an Opportunity again, to instruct a Woman that was almost eaten up with Cancers, so that she was at length baptiz'd by Father Bechamel, the Day before we left this Place. This Father was so weak, that he could not repeat his Breviary walking; and yet the next Day, he was strong enough to walk near a League from thence to embark. There now remain'd but one Difficulty to encounter with, since we were in the Hands of Three very honest Nouragues; and that was, how to get away from Caniati's Cottage, with our little Chest that contain'd all our Goods; and to find a convenient Passage to the Mouth of the Aproague; for I had promis'd Caniati, to continue with him after my return from the Acouas; and those People are not very easie, when they see us carry our Commodities out of their Cottages; so that we had Reason to fear, that he would detain us with him, at least Two Months, before he would conduct us to

the Lake of Parima.
the Indians, that dwell at the mouth of the Aproague: But it pleas’d God to remove all these Obstructions; for our Three Nouragues promis’d to convey us to the Sea, upon condition that we would give ’em an indifferent Reward. And as we went by Camiati’s Cottage, we found he was gone a Hunting, and those we found in his Cottage were only his Two Wives, and some Strangers, who durst not hinder us from taking our little Chest, and our Three Guides, tho’ they were afraid to displease Camiati their Chief, yet knew not how to refuse to lead us to a Cottage that was a League lower, where at that time no body dwelt, and hither they were to go in order to pass by Land to Caratibo where they dwelt, and to conduct their Wives thither, and then to come back again to us; tho’ they would fain have set us ashore at Camiati’s House, and left us there.
When we Arriv’d at the empty Cottage, I found my self so ill, that I thought I should have died; but being somewhat recruited again, and perceiving the Master of the Canioo had a mind to go and speak with Camiati, and that one of our Servants desir’d to go with him, to fetch a Hound he had bought that was run away thither. I gave him an Iron-tool of half a Crown price to present from me to Camiati, that he might or-

der his Wives to prepare me a Hamock, and bid him tell him I would pay the rest at my return, which should be as soon as I had recover'd my Health; this I did to prevent his offering any injury to our Servant, and that he might not oppose us in our design of going back. The Master of the Canoo told the Story of the Affront the Young Morou gave us, and of the ill Condition of my Health, so well to Camitati, that when he had receiv'd the Present I sent him, he would needs accompany me to the Mouth of the Apreague, to the Cottage of the Chief of the Sapayes, whom he had had a mind to Visit a great while, being his very good Friend. He came accordingly the next day with one of his Sons, who was about Thirty Years of Age, and his Two Wives, and sent home Two of our Guides, taking their places, he sent the Woman, and one of our Servants one League by Land. Our other Servant continued in the Canoo to row, or to use the Term of the Country to Pagay, with these Three stout Nouragues; we also remain'd in the Canoo, by reason of our Weakness, which would not suffer us to go this League by Land. They lighted the Canoo thus, that they might the better pass a fall of the River, that was so rough and difficult, that the Indians could not choose but turn pale at the extreme danger we

were in. One time amongst others they toil'd so hard to keep the Canoo from being carry'd down a precipice of Water, that when they had made shift to get under a Rock, that breaks the Violence of the Stream, they were forc'd to rest themselves for half a quarter of an Hour, because they were so much spent, that they could scarce fetch their Breath. I have twice been very near being cast away in two Ships, but the sight of this fall of the River was more dreadful to me, than any thing I ever saw at Sea.
The Nineteenth of June we pass'd down Two of these Falls, at the first they sent the Women away by Land, and cross'd the River to know of a Galibi that was lately come thither to make a new Cottage, what course they had best take to avoid being over-set, because the Bed of the River declin'd, so that it gave an extraordinary rapidity to the Stream; and besides there were a great many Rocks under water, against which we were liable to be dash'd, and so cast away. And observing our Men were in a great perplexity in their minds about it, notwithstanding all the directions this Man gave 'em, we intreated him to conduct us through this difficult passage, promising him a Fishing-hook for his pains, which he willingly undertook, and happily perform'd. At the Second which was the last we met

with upon the Aproague, we all went ashore and walk'd along the River-side upon very uneven Rocks, and the Nouragues held the Canoo by a Line which they tied behind it, and so let it go gently down this place, which is very dangerous at Low-water, for the Flowing of the Tide covers it, tho' 'tis Twenty Leagues up the River.
After we had pass'd these many difficulties by the mercy of God; we at last had no Cassave left, no Meat nor Fish, nor Ovicou, when we were distant a day's Voyage and a half from the Cottage of the Sapayes, but God of his Goodness was pleas'd to make Provision for our great necessity; for as we coasted along the River we saw a Dog barking; upon which the Nouragues call'd out to know if any body were a Hunting, and presently to their great joy perceiv'd it was their good Friend, the Chief of the Sapayes, who came to us, and saluted us all with demonstrations of Friendship. We did what the Nouragues would not venture to do, that is, to ask him to sell us some Provision; acquainting him, that neither we nor the Nouragues had any left. When he understood in what necessity we were, he sent to fetch his Canoo, which was a large one, and very well stor'd with Cassave, Ovicou, Meat and Fish (24) Boncaneed, which he furnish'd us and the Nouragues,

and we paid him for it immediately. He told us his Lodging was a League off, whither he would come and meet us in the Evening, and that because his little half-cover’d Hut had only room enough for him and his Men, we must make another for our selves. He came according to his word toward Night, and the next day he made Father Bechamel and me go into his Canoo, because he thought the Nouragues Canoo was over-loaded.
On the 21st we Arriv’d at the Cottage of this Chief of the Sapayes, where we were kindly entertain’d. We were no sooner got thither, but we began to think how we should get from thence to Cayenne; and we could think of no better way, than to perswade the Chief of the Sapayes to conduct us thither himself, which would have taken up Three Weeks time, and would have been a great charge to us, but the Providence of God had made Provision for us, for the next day we were inform’d that a Chief of the Galibis would come the day following to take a Sapaye with him to go to Cayenne, and from thence to Maroni, from whence he was to fetch his Son, who had been there with the Sapayes for Two Years, as well as the Son of the Chief of the Sapayes. He was willing to take us in his Canoo for a small matter, and we went to

Lodge at a small Island, which is in the River at a pretty good distance from the Sea; here we stay’d the Twenty fourth of June. I observ’d that the Sea came up here Eight Foot high, and concluded from thence, because it covers the last Fall of the River, that it declines but Eight Foot in the space of Twenty five Leagues from the Sea. In the Night they heard the Cry of a Bird, and said to one another in the Galibis Tongue, Hark how the Devil cries; I reprov’d ‘em, telling ‘em they were mistaken, and that the Devil had no Body, but was a Spirit as our Souls are, which they confess to be Invisible and Immortal; which yet they do not say of the Devils, but pretend that their Physicians or Piaies kill ‘em with great Clubs. The Nouragues of one Cottage made the Figure of a Man in the way by which they thought the Devil came to their Cottage in the Night, to make ‘em Sick; that so while he stop’d at this Fantome and took it to be a Nourague, the Piaies that watch’d for him might take their opportunity, when they saw him, to knock him on the head. We parted from this Island to go and lodge at Co, from whence the next day we saw a great many Canoos of the Galibis at Sea, which were going toward the River of Amazons, these the Master of our Canoo, and the Sapaye went

went to visit, drawing their Canoos along over the Mud at Low-water, and found in one of 'em the Two Young Men they were going to seek for at Maroui. They had now nothing to do but to carry us to Cayenne; and because the Sea was so rough, that they could not well bear up against it, we desir'd 'em to set us ashore at Mahuti, the first place we could land at in the Island of Cayenne, which they compass'd with a great deal of Labour. As soon as I set my Foot upon the Sand, I fell down upon my Knees to thank God for the Protection he had favour'd us with for a Hundred and Seventy Leagues, since we came from the Country of the Acoquas, for our whole Voyage was Two hundred and forty Leagues. We went to lodge at the House of Monsr. Fontain, whose Estate lies in this part of the Island; and he receiv'd us with great Joy. The next day being the Twenty seventh, Father Bechet came to fetch us with Two Horses, and we borrow'd another of (25) Monsieur Fontaine, and so Arriv'd at the Fort of Cayenne, where the Governor was pleas'd to treat us with all imaginable Friendship. And all the People came about us, to see us, and to signifie the great affection they had to us. In three Months I hope by the Grace of God to Visit the Marshes of the Aracarets, the Pali-

comrs, the Mayes, the Marones, and the Conflades, whose Habitations stand more thick and close one to another, than those I have given an account of in this Relation. Here's a great Field open'd to the Gospel-Labourers, into which I am ready to conduct those that are willing to employ themselves in it, as well as to discover to 'em a great many other Nations: Being fully resolv'd by the Grace of God to expose my Life for so Glorious a purpose, as the Propagation of the Gospel, and the Conversion of such Numbers of People.

NOTES UPON THE TRAVELS OF Father JOHN GRILLET, AND Father FRANCIS BECHAMEL, Jesuits, INTO GUIANA.

Note (1) in the Letter.
A Fort which the Dutch took from the English Fourteen or Fifteen Year ago, on which the English Colony depends, which is pretty Numerous, and was Establish’d there Eight or Ten Years before under the Command of the Lord Willoughby. This Fort was built by the French in 1644, they quitted it in 1646, for the Reasons that have been reported in divers Relations.

Note (2) P. 3. This River discharges it self into the Sea on the East-side of the Cayenne.

Note (3) Ibid. Of Ouicon they make a sort of Drink of the Consistence and Colour of

of Milk, by steeping it in Water, it will keep a Month or Six Weeks in a kind of Baskets lin’d with the Leaves of Bonana-Trees, which are 4 or 5 Foot long, and above 2 Foot wide.

Note (4) Ibid. The Brother of the Marquis de la Barre, who was formerly Governor, and the King’s Lieutenant General in the American Islands, both by Sea and Land, and is now a Captain of one of his Majesty’s Ships.

Note (5) P. 4. The Mouth of this River is 14 Leagues Eastward from Cayenne.

Note (6) P. 5. This is one of the Nations that fled into the Country of the Galibis.

Note (7) Ibid. In these Huts or Cottages the Indians hang their Hamocks or Cotton-beds when the Sun sets, in which they repose themselves all Night. They ordinarily rise with the Sun, and then their Wives take down their Beds and Hamocks, and hang ’em in the Carbet, which is their kind of Hall or Out-house, the Props of which not only serve to support the Roof, which is made of Palm-leaves, but also to hang up all the Beds of the Men and Boys in the Family, and those of Strangers, when at any time they entertain ’em. This Carbet is plac’d Ten or Twelve paces on the upper-side of the Cottage, in which the Women always leave their own Beds. At one end of the Cottage

they commonly make Cassave, and their Liquor Ouicou; this part of it serves for the Kitchin, and for all the Work that belongs to the subsistance of the Family. Some of these Cottages have a Loft above to hang their Beds in in the Night; and then the lower part of the Hut serves for the Carbet; where the Men spend the day (when they are at home) in making their Bows and Arrows, and what other conveniencies they want; for their business is different from that of the Women in these Parts, as well as in most other Places. But there's one thing belonging to the other Sex which the Men have usurp'd, that deserves to be treated on in a particular Article, of which I shall only speak a word or two here by the by. They go to bed, when their Wives are deliver'd, and receive the Compliments of their happy delivery as if they had endur'd the pain, and accordingly answer their Visitors as the Women do on the like occasion in other places. This Custom is not peculiar to the Galibis, but is us'd in a great many other Nations of Brasil, and in other parts of America.

'Tis farther to be noted, that their Carbets are the places where they hold their Consultations, and deliberate on their most weighty Affairs, which is ordinarily done with great Solemnity; those that are concern'd and invited, assembling together from divers places for this purpose.

Notes upon the
Note (8) Ibid. This Nation dwells near the mouth of the River of Amazons.
Note (9) P. 7. This is the ordinary Bread of the Country, made of a sort of Root, which they scrape, and then press to get the Water out of it, which is a cold Poison, and will kill Men, or Beasts if they drink but half a glas of it; which for all that may be put in Sauces and Pottage, and gives 'em a better relish, provided it be but boyl'd tho' never so little, after which it has no pernicious quality.
Note (10) P. 11. Piaie is a Name which the Galibis give their Physicians, who besides the practise of Physick pretend also to Divination; but they profess neither, till they have made divers Experiments, one of which is so dangerous that it often makes 'em burst. They stamp the green Leaves of Tobacco, and squeeze out the Juice of it, of which they drink the quantity of a large Glass full; so that none but those that are of a very robust Constitution, who try this practise upon themselves, escape with their Lives. Besides divers sorts of Plants, Gumms, and Wood they use to cure diseases and wounds, they have a way of sucking their Patients in that part of the Body in which they feel their pain; and this method is most commonly very successful.
Note (11) P. 15. The reason why they employ so much time in making their Canoos,

is because after they have chosen and fell’d a Tree, and have with a Hatchet made it hollow, about the breadth of half a Foot, and about the same depth through the whole length of it, they hollow the rest of it with a gentle Fire; and this work, which goes on very slowly, continues in proportion to the bulk of the piece of Timber, and to the length they give their Canoo. This way of making their Canoos is very tedious, but tends much to their duration, so that they scarce ever rot, because after they are thus made, the Worm never touches ‘em, which is also partly owing to the hardness of the Wood; there being scarce any betwixt the Tropicks but has this quality.

Note (12) P. 17. The Commodities that have vent among these Nations are Hatchets, Bills, Knives, Looking-glasses, Hooks, &c.

Note (13) P. 19. ‘Tis the Custom of this Nation to use their Children after this manner.

Note (14) Ibid. In the Year 1625, the English attempted to make a Settlement at Cayenne, & these Three who were devour’d by the Indians were probably some of ‘em, for their Establishment did not succeed, they being defeated by the Indians, for not managing themselves well towards ‘em. Their Principal Plantation was at Cayenne, upon the River Remire. The same disappointment befell the Dutch some Years after.

Notes upon the
Note (15) P. 21. The Poop of great Canoos being commonly joyn’d to the rest, they caulk it with a sort of fat Earth, which the Water in a little time washes away, and therefore they are oblig’d to put it in a fresh from time to time; and this they call mending or refitting a Canoo.
Note (16) P. 22. The mouth of this River enters into the Amazone, and into the River of Cayenne, about 20 Leagues from the Aproague; ’twas from hence that Monsr. Iecy, the Governor of Cayenne, with 10 Men drove away 6 or 700 of the Dutch, in the last Wars we had with them; tho’ they had a Fort there with some pieces of Canon. At the same time they were likewise twice driven from the River Aproague, where they also had a Fort defended with Canon.
Note (17) P. 25. Tamouci, or Tamechi signifies Old, and Cabo signifies Heaven in the Galibian Tongue.
Note (18) P. 27. Line 9. When the English came from Barbadoes, with 4 or 5 Frigats, to make a descent upon Cayenne in the Year 1666, Father Grillet was Superior of the Jesuits there, and was some time amongst the English, who left him there with the rest of the Colony when they went away.
Note (19) P. 28. ’Tis true, they drink but little or nothing at their ordinary meals till they have done eating, and then com-

monthly drink one draught; but when they assemble together, either for Warlike Enterprizes, or to begin a Canoo, or to launch it when 'tis made, and when they make a Chief, or admit him into their Council, after they have expos'd him to several rude kind of Trials; they have extraordinary Rejoycings, which frequently hold 3 or 4 days, continuing till they have drank up all their Liquor; which is what the French call Faire un Vin. For these occasions they make 3 or 4 different sorts of Drink, some of which become very strong by fermentation, as that which they call Palinot, which they make with Cassave that is bak'd more than ordinary: The pieces of which they pile up one upon another when they are very hot, and keep 'em thus till they begin to be mouldy, after which they mix them with Potatoes, which they cut in small pieces as well as the Cassave, and put them in great Earthen Jarrs, then they pour a proportionate quantity of Water upon 'em, and so leave all to ferment and work together till this Liquor is as strong as they desire; which is after about 5 or 6 days fermentation. They strain it before they use it, and then 'tis of the Colour and Consistence of Beer, of a much better tast, but much more heady and intoxicating. They have besides a great many sorts of drink, the diversity of which Results

from the different Fruits of which they make 'em. But that which they ordinarily make use of, is as white as Milk, and of the same consistence. It is very refreshing and nourishing, and is compos'd of Cassave bak'd after their ordinary manner, and Potatoes boil'd with it, till they are of the consistence of Paste, this they put into Baskets lin'd with the Leaves of Bonano-trees, in which it keeps good for a Month, and then begins to grow sower, but not quite so soon if it be kept in a cool place. When they use it, they steep as much as they have present occasion for in a sufficient quantity of Water, and if they are at leisure they strain it: But they often only steep it, and drink it without straining, and if Sugar or Sugar-cains bruis'd be mix'd with it, it comes very near the tast, and colour, and consistence of Orgeate, the use of which the French have taken from the Italians some Years since. This drink is call'd Ouvacou upon the Continent, and Ovicou in the Islands. 'Tis believ'd that the reason why the Europeans can never attain to make it so good as the Indians do, is because these chew the Potatoes and Cassave, before they boil 'em together, and understand better what degree of boyling they require, to give this Liquor its greatest perfection. But the seeing this way of its preparation turns ones stomach more than the reading of it; and

the Wine that washes the dirty Feet of the Grape-gatherers as they tread the Grapes is no less nauseous, but the Fermentation both of the one and the other corrects all this uncleanness.
Note (20) P. 30. This is their common way of expressing things they cannot number, saying Enoura, which signifies [thus much.]
Note (21) P. 31. This Nation is situated towards the Source of the River Maroni, the Mouth of which is about 50 Leagues from Cayenne Westward, and 30 from the River Surinam; where the Dutch have a Fort, which the French built in the Year, 1644, and were oblig’d to quit in 1646, for want of Help from France. This Fort is 3 Leagues from the Mouth of the Surinam, on the Right-hand as you enter into it. The Lord Willoughby retir’d thither in 1648, or 1649, with a Colony of 1000 or 1200 English, who endeavour’d to support the Interest of the King of England against Cromwell, in the Barbadoes; that is, those of the Antilles, or Antego Islands, which the English have; for the English call all those Islands, the Barbadoes, as the French call all the Antilles they possess, St. Christopher’s Islands.
Note (22) P. 32. There are several sorts of Tools proper for the Indians, of the Value of about Half a Crown, Two Shillings, Twenty-pence, Fifteen-pence, &c. as Hatch-

ets or Axes, Bills, with Wooden Handles, others with Iron Handles, in the Socket of which they may be fix’d or taken off at Pleasure; and such little Planing-Axes, as Cooper’s Use; this Tool serves the Indians in making their Canoos, particularly in hollowing the inside of the Tree, they design for that use: They also use Plains to smooth the outside of the Canoos, as well as for other Works.

Note (23) Ibid. A Hamock is an Indian Bed, made of Cotton; tho’ they all hang ’em up by the two ends, when they would lie in ’em, sometimes upon 2 Trees, at 10 or 12 Foot distance, and sometimes at two of the Posts that support their Houses, or their Carbets; yet they differ very much both in the Stuff and Work. For Instance, All the Hamocks that are made from the River of Amazons to the Orenoque, are of Cotton, made full, and almost all without Fringe on the sides; most of ’em colour’d with Rocon, or red Paint, quarter’d in Flourishes that are made with pretty good Proportion and exactness; these are most esteem’d for Use, especially in the Islands, because they last a great while; and are stronger than those of Brazil, which are so thin, one may generally see through ’em, and are made of twin’d Cotton, much finer than those of Guiana, which are also made of twisted



Shuttle, which they put through the Threads, to weave it after the Manner of our Cloth: But because they put their Shuttle through Thread by Thread, one above and the other below; this Work is extreamly tedious, and has need of no less Patience than theirs.

Those of Brazil having much more work about 'em, require the more Time and Industry to make 'em; but one sort and another are very much bought in the Islands, where almost all the Europeans make use of 'em; and they are very good to use in Europe, especially in those Places, where they have but bad and uncleanly Beds, particularly Spain and Italy, whither one might carry 'em without much trouble, they being very light; for the biggest of 'em don't weigh above 5 or 6 Pound, and those of Brazil not above half so much, because they are thin and fine; with 2 Pegs, or 2 great Nails they may be hang'd up any where. The Indians place the Props of their Houses at a convenient distance one from another, for this Purpose: They don't go out far into the Country without these Beds; and there are always enough left in their Houses for Strangers.

This sort of Beds is likewise us'd almost in all Southern America, to carry wounded or sick People in; those that are put to this

use, have at each end a great Ring, through which they put a Pole of a sufficient length for the Bed, and strong enough to bear a Man's Weight: And thus two Indians, one before and other behind, carry the sick Man, supported in his Hamock, by the Pole which they bear upon their Shoulders.

The Arouagues, the Araotes, and most of the other Nations, toward the River Orenoque, make their Beds of the Thread of Pite, in Net-work, which they hang up after the Manner the other do their Cotton Hamocks. Pite is a kind of Hemp or Flax, but much longer and whiter, of this they make their Cords for the Tackling of the Masts and Sails of their Canoos, as for other Occasions; this Pite is also much lighter and stronger than Hemp, and nothing near so apt to rot in the Water; they make very fine Thread of it to mend their Arrows, and for other such uses. Perhaps the Aloe Yucca foliis, Catal. Plantar. Jamaic. p. 118.

Note (24) P. 40. Boucanee that is, dry'd without being salted, upon a kind of Grate made of Sticks, plac'd about 3 Foot above the Fire, they Boucanee Meat as well as Fish; and the Word Boucaniers comes from this, because they usually live upon Meat or Fish dres'd after this Manner. This Name was given to the French in the Island of St. Domingo; because, before they had

Houses, as they now have in the Western Part of the Island, they liv’d only upon Beef thus dress’d; and sold the Hides of the Bulls and Cows, which they kill’d, to the Captains of Ships, for Guns, Powder and Shot, Shirts and Drawers, which was all their Equipage. They were then Vagabonds in the Island, and had no Houses, but now are settled there, and plant a great deal of Tobacco in spight of the Spaniards. They are under the Command of the Governour of la Tortue, a small Island that lies near St. Domingo, on the West-side: And ’tis suppos’d, that the Number of these Boucaniers surpasses that of all the rest of the French in those American Islands, call’d the Antilles. These Boucaniers have perform’d such surprizing Exploits against the Spaniards at Porto-Velo, at Panama, in New Spain, and elsewhere, that what we are told in the Accounts of the Country concerning ’em are almost incredible, but that a Spaniard has lately taken care to immortalize their Memory; who has in his own Language given us the History of divers Expeditions of these Adventurers, in a Volumn in 4to. Printed at Cologne, in the Year 1681, with Figures.

A RELATION OF GUIANA, AND OF THE COMMERCE THAT May be Settled there.

Guiana is a great Country, on the Continent of Northern America, which extends in Latitude, from the Equinoctial Line, to the Tenth Degree, on the side of the Arctique Pole, and in Longitude from the River of Amazons to the Orenoque, which contains near Four Hundred Leagues on the Sea-Coasts, with an immense Stretch into the Countries that border upon Brazil, on the South-side, and New Andalusia on the West.

Our French Seamen are wont to call Guiana by the Name, of the North-Cape, because that is the most remarkable Cape on that Coast; and those that have Business in those Parts, commonly put ashore there, to get some Knowledge of the Country.
This Cape is between the 2 and 3 Degrees of Northern Latitude, and between the 345 and the 346 Degrees of Longitude. This Part of the Continent is water'd with abundance of Rivers, some of which will carry great Vessels up a considerable Way beyond the Mouths of 'em; and upon the Shoars of 'em; an infinite Number of Plantations might be made, which would turn to a very considerable Account, as well in regard of the Traffick that might be made with the Natives, and the Fishing-Trade that might be carried on in these Rivers, and along the Sea-Coast, as of the Product of the Labour and Industry of the Planters.
The divers Settlements the French have made there at different Times, sufficiently prove the Possibility of living in good Correspondence with the Indians, provided they be treated civilly; and with more Honesty and Sincerity than * they have done, who have hitherto had the Conduct of these kind of Enterprizes,

fall into their Hands. The ill Treatment the Natives have receiv’d from them, for which they have sometimes made themselves amends by way of Reprizal, have not render’d ‘em irreconcilable, as we have been taught by Experience, when we have made tryal of it on different Occasions.

They are tolerably endued with good Sense, which they have opportunity to cultivate and refine by a long Train of Experiences, with which the many Years they live, furnish ‘em: For they count a Man dies young, if he don’t live above 100 Years.

They have a pretty good Judgment, and have good rational Thoughts, about things within the Compass of their Notice, and within the Reach of the Light of Nature, with which alone they are furnish’d.

They observe their Words with great Exactness, and inviolably practise the Maxim, of not doing to others, what they would not have others do to them.

They are rather inclin’d to Peace than War, which yet they engage in, either when they have some just Quarrel, or when Revenge or Honour prompt ‘em to it.

They are sufficiently industrious, and although they have both Patience and Skill in Fishing and Hunting, yet they have the Fore-sight, not to let their Subsistance depend upon Hazard; and therefore willing-

ly cultivate their Ground, in proportion to their Occasions, and the Bigness of their Families.

Before Europe had furnish'd them with Tools of Iron and Steel for this Purpose, they made themselves some of hard Stones; but besides that the Labour of making 'em was intolerable, the Pains they took in using of 'em, was also so very great, that they laid aside the use of 'em as soon as they found they could do more Work in a Day with our Hatchets, Bills and Knives, than they could do in 6 Months with their Stone Tools; which now are good for nothing, but to be kept in the Closets of the Curious, as so many Proofs of the wonderful Patience of those People.

They speak a Tongue, which is not only understood by all the Nations, which the Spaniards on one side, and the Portuguese on the other, have oblig'd to retire into Guiana; but is also intelligible to the Carraibes, who are the Natives of the Antilles, and use this Language: Which I have known by the Indians of the Isles of St. Vincent, St. Domingo, and others where I had occasion to converse with them. In short, this Language is spoken for the Space of above Four Hundred Leagues on the Sea-Coasts, and in many Places above Sixscore Leagues up in the Country.

A Relation of Guiana.
They bring up all sorts of tame Fowl, which they exchange with us for Toys, as well as wild Fowl, and other Game, which is there in great Plenty; as also abundance, both of Sea, and Fresh-water Fish.
They build us Houses after their Fashion, which are commodious enough for the Country; they clear our Ground and carry our Letters, they serve to load and unload Merchant Ships; and in a Word, there's scarce any kind of Service but may be obtain'd of 'em by a courteous Carriage, and by giving 'em a few Trifles of a small Value, when they have occasion for 'em. They undertake even to load Ships entirely with a kind of Fish, which they catch in the Rivers with a sort of Harping-Iron; and this they perform upon such reasonable Terms, that those who follow this Trade by their Means, always find an extraordinary Profit in it; because the Vent of 'em is always speedy and certain in the Islands, where there is a great Consumption of 'em made; so that one may say, this sort of Fish, and the Sea-Tortoise, are the Cod-fish of the Continent, and the Antego Islands.
And 'tis the Manna, upon which the Colonies between the Tropiques live, as much as many of the Europeans, and some others, do upon Cod-fish. This Fishing Trade is practis'd all the Year in most of the Ri-

vers on this Coast, except the Fishing for Tortoise, which holds but 3 or 4 Months in the Year; during which, the Females come to lay their Eggs in the Sand, beyond the Marks that are left of the highest Tides, and that in so great abundance, (especially on the Shoars that are least frequented) as can hardly be imagin'd: For 10 Men can turn as many of 'em in a Night, as 100 can dress in a Week.
In the Night, which is the only time they take to lay their Eggs, they wait till they have pass'd the Bounds, which the highest Tides have mark'd, and then turn 'em upon their Backs, and being once in this Posture, they can by no means recover themselves upon their Feet to go back into the Sea.
Among the Plants which the Indians cultivate in their Plantations, Cotton is one of those that principally employs 'em, especially the Women who make this their particular business; and thus find means to adorn themselves; for they know how to spin it as fine as can be desir'd. And if the disorders that have happen'd in the Colonies upon the Continent, had not hinder'd the Establishing a Regular Traffick of it, which might have been easily accomplish'd; I say, if it had not been for this, all Europe might have been furnish'd with it, in all manner of ways in which it could have been

imploy'd, without costing the French any more trouble or charge in a manner, than that of receiving it; because of the natural and general inclination the Indians have both for Work, and for Finery; esteeming a grain of Christal to hang about their Neck or at their Ears, as much as we should do a Diamond of the same bigness.

Besides, it being well known, that Cotton is one of those Commodities that are consum'd the most in Europe, and the Price of which is least varied, the Inhabitants of the Islands would never have left off cultivating it, if there had been Women enough to spin it, without which it can't be Transported but with a great deal of Trouble, and little Profit.

The Hamocks or Cotton-beds which the Indians sell us for a Bill or Hatchet, are afterwards sold in the Islands with considerable Advantage; every one there having one of 'em, and there are none of them brought from any other Country than Guiana, except from Brasil, and that but rarely, because of the small Commerce the French have there.

Their Rocou is a red Die, and valuable when 'tis natural, such as the Indians sell us, before it has been falsified by Foreigners, who carry it into Europe. See Uruou in Catal. Plant. Jamaic. P. 150.

There are to be had among 'em likewise divers sorts of Gumms, Woods, and Roots proper for Physick, which are good Commodities in France, as well as several sorts of Wood proper for Dying; and for making of Cabinets and Inlaid Works, among which is the Letter-wood, which the French call Bois de la Chine, and which grows in no other place in the World but on this part of the Continent. The Natives cut it and carry it in great burthens quite to the Ships so cheap, that a 1000 weight of it comes to but a Crown; whereas that quantity was a long time sold for a 100 Crowns, and never for less than 150 Livres.

Besides those Animals that are fit for sport; as Apes of divers kinds, Sapajous, Tamarins, Sagouins, Parrots, Arras and Toucans: I omit a great many other things, which this Country produces; and one may say, this large Compass of Ground has moreover this Advantage above the Islands of America, that there is no fear of tiring it; as we are taught by Experience, the Island of St. Christopher, and others have been in a little Space of Time, where the Land is become almost barren, meerly by being over-burden'd with continual Crops, because it can never be suffer'd to rest, by Reason of the small Portion of Ground that every Inhabitant possesses; which yet does not

hinder 'em from raising every Year a prodigious Quantity of Sugar, besides Ginger, Indigo, Cassia, and other Commodities that are cultivated and made there.
This Country of Guiana is diversified with Hills, Plains and Meadows; and there are scarce any Mountains but would turn to a good Account, if they were manur'd: The Land is every where so fertile, that one Man may easily get, with his own Hands, a Livelihood for Twenty People, the Cultivation of it is so very easie. The Fruits of it are excellent, and very plentiful; and all our sorts of Corn grow there all the Year round, without distinction of Seasons, and that in a very little time: And there being no Winter, the Trees are alternately cover'd with Blossoms and Fruits, and always with Leaves.
The Air is very good, and the Climate very Temperate, tho' it be between the Tropiques; for the Heat is continually mitigated by a fresh East-wind, which blows all the Year, except in the Night, when the Breezes come from the Land, which are only felt one or two Leagues toward the Sea.
The Waters are excellent, and keep good throughout the longest Voyages, as has been often experienc'd in Europe, where they are never found to stink at the Re-

This Account being drawn up only as a Succinct Memoir of Guiana in general, and of Cayenne in particular; I thought not meet to extend it further, nor to give the Detail of a Country, where the French have now a Colony, from whence a more ample Information may be expected.

F I N I S.









