Reverend Father, The discovery that I and Father Bechamel have made of various savage nations on the continent of Guiana, near the island of Cayenne, obliges me to draw up a brief account of our voyage and to present it to your Reverence, so that you may know what work we may have here, and how many missionaries may find a suitable opportunity to exercise their zeal. If I had had some companions whom I might have left with the Nouragues and the Acoquas, I should have penetrated much farther into the country; but the Nouragues, who were our guides, not daring to advance farther into the country of the Acoquas, to retain the goodwill of both, we should have left a missionary in each of these nations, so that the Acoquas might have conducted us to their friends, who (as far as I can conjecture) reach quite to the equinoctial line. We might also have passed to the west of the River Maroni, and have entered into an alliance with the nations that extend to the River of Surinam, upon which the Dutch have planted a colony; but since we have confined ourselves to those countries that are from three degrees of northern latitude to the equinoctial line, we need not be afraid that the people of any European nation will trouble us in our missions, because there is no gain to be made by them; besides, we run the risk of being massacred by the natives. It is from your Reverence that we expect support and assistance as far as you are able and shall think convenient in sending us missionaries of a vigorous constitution, of great virtue, and of a disposition ready to suffer hardships; because in these parts there can be little or no accommodations brought to relieve them in case of sickness; for the less one carries there, so much the better; besides that the ignorance and barbarity of those people always give a missionary just cause to fear that they may form harmful intentions against him at the very first sign of dissatisfaction they receive. I expect here a good number of missionaries to be sent throughout this vast country; and I hope your Reverence will not refuse this request, which obliges me particularly to recommend myself to your good prayers, who am Reverend Father, your most humble and most obedient servant in our Lord, John Grillet, of the Society of Jesus.

Superior-General of the said Missions, and Father Mace, and Father Alarole; he arrived in the Island of Cayenne on the 21st of December, 1673, and departed ten days later. During his stay, he regulated various affairs, both temporal and spiritual; and among other things, finding that we had yet no knowledge of any other people but the Galibis and Aracarers, our neighbors who dwell near the sea and among whom the Fathers of our Society employed their talents with great zeal, he resolved to attempt a discovery of those nations that lie remote from the sea. It was my good fortune to be chosen for so pious a work; and I was particularly instructed by my orders to discover the Acouquas, a very populous nation, according to the report some Nouragues, who frequent the Galibis, gave us; telling us also that they were a warlike people and used to eat men. One of these Nouragues, being asked two months before the arrival of the Reverend Father Visitor if it were true that the Acouquas used to eat their enemies, answered that he came from them four months ago, and then they had just finished boiling in their pots and eating a nation which they had destroyed. I desired the Reverend Father Francis Bechamel for my companion, who has great zeal for these missions and an extraordinary ability to learn strange languages; besides, he already understood the tongue of the Galibis, which many of the Nouragues also speak, some of whom we were obliged to take for our guides to conduct us to the Acouquas, for we yet know no other way to reach them but through the country of the Nouragues. And Father Bechamel took care to provide some Galibis to conduct us to the Nouragues, who dwell above the source of the River Uvia, and to buy some cassava and paste of Ovicou for his voyage, which we counted would be about ten days. This Father, having provided all necessities—namely, three Galibis, some cassava, and paste of Ovicou—in hopes of finding by the good providence of God either fish or venison with the assistance of our Indians, we left the port of Cayenne on the 25th of January, taking our leave of the Reverend Father Brion, Superior-General, and Father Mace, and Father Bechet, but particularly of the Chevalier de Lexy, our governor, who did us the honor to conduct us, together with the Fathers of our Society, all the way to the canoe in which we embarked in the afternoon, having our fisherman to steer the canoe and three Indian Galibis to row with our two servants. All of us were of the opinion that our canoe was too small, and indeed it would have proved so if we had embarked at the coming up of the tide, for at that time the waves are very rough near the shore; but we avoided this danger by embarking a little before the tide came up, so that we were out of all danger when the tide began to drive us into the river, which gives its name to this island; besides, our canoe being very light, and not

Easy to be turned, it was very suitable for getting past several small falls in the River Uvia, which we had to traverse almost entirely until we reached the entrance of a smaller river that led us into the country of the Nouragues, the first nation we wished to become acquainted with, so that through them we might find a passage to the Acoquas. Our route was between the island of Cayenne and the mainland; and in the evening we arrived at the house of one Deslauriers, who had settled there; we stayed with him for a particular reason all the next day, being the 26th of January. Since God was pleased to protect and guide us, as it were, by the hand throughout this journey, we must confess that it was He who inspired us with the resolve to begin it by the River Uvia; for we knew only two ways of entering the country of the Nouragues, one by the River Uvia, and the other by the River Aproague; the latter is very difficult, because the waterfalls are so great that the Sapayes and Galibis, who live at the mouth of this river, demand a very large reward to undertake the journey, and indeed are even more reluctant because they fear the Nouragues, who eat human flesh. Thus, when any of them go into those parts, they stay as little time as possible. Therefore, it is hardly possible to go that way, and if we had done so, we would have been entirely unacquainted with the Indians living along the River Uvia and with the Nouragues living above its source. But, without knowing any of this beforehand, we chose to enter the country of the Nouragues by the Uvia, and in this way visited that whole nation. On the 27th of January, we left Sieur Deslauriers somewhat late and therefore traveled only a short distance that day. Our Galibis brought us to a hut of the Maprouanes, both to shelter us from a heavy rain and to lodge us there for the night. These Maprouanes, about thirty in number, had withdrawn from their country near the River of Amazons to avoid persecution by the Portuguese and by those Indians called the Arianes, who have nearly exterminated that nation. We found nothing there but cassava and ovicou; and until the 6th of February, we had nothing but cassava, except for two fish and a couple of fowl the Galibis caught (which served us for four small meals) and a small piece of fish we found at another Indian cottage. On the 28th, we arrived at a mountain where a certain Galibi named Maure lives; this is twelve leagues from the mouth of the Uvia. Two leagues below this mountain, the land along the river, which until then is very low and almost always flooded, becomes high and fine as far as the dwelling of the first Nouragues. On the 29th, we slept in a wood, and so we did on the 30th, having passed by a village of the Galibis, which contained very few people, to make a longer day's journey. On the 31st we

lodged in a Galibi’s cottage, whose family consisted of about six or seven, but three or four of them were absent. On the first of February, we spent the night in the woods, and on the second, we stayed again at a Galibi’s cottage; this was the poorest and most pitiful hut I had ever seen among the Indians of this country. There was only one man, his wife, and children, who had nothing at all to eat that day. One of their children was greatly swollen and in a languishing condition, suffering from a continual fever, from which we thought it could never recover; therefore, Father Bechamel baptized it, and the comfort this gave us sweetened all our past hardships. On the third, we went ashore in the country of the Nouragues, after having, that day and the day before, passed three falls in the River Uvia, and another in the River of the Nouragues; but this was nothing compared to the falls we were to pass on the Rivers of Aproague and Camopi. It was now time to land, for our cassava would have been spent if we had had much farther to go in those great deserts and vast forests that stretch along this river, where there are no other cottages but those I have mentioned, and those of some Galibis and Areacarets, who live near its mouth and number about a hundred or a hundred and twenty people. This river winds greatly and runs a course of nearly fifty leagues. Our Galibis served us on this voyage with much respect and gave us access to the chief of these first Nouragues, to whom we presented a hatchet to engage him in an alliance with us. They did not remember seeing more than one Frenchman before in their country, so the women and girls, who had never traveled to the country of the Galibis, were greatly amazed at the sight of us. If one might judge the whole nation by these people, one could very well say the Nouragues are a very courteous and affable people. Some of them could speak the language of the Galibis very well and served as our interpreters. They did all they could to find provisions and treat us well, but being unsuccessful in their hunting, we had only cassava and a little meat at one of our meals, but with great demonstrations of their kindness. We bought cassava from them to supply the men belonging to our canoes; and on the sixth of February, after the Galibis had been treated with a small feast in the fashion of the country, they parted from us at about ten o’clock in the morning. We also left this first cottage of the Nouragues on the seventh of February, to undertake a journey of twenty-four leagues by land over very rugged mountains; but we went only half a league from there to lodge that night, being accompanied by two young Nouragues, each about sixteen or seventeen years old, who were to carry our baggage. Here we were to take another man, who had promised to carry our provisions for us, which consisted of cassava, and

This man's wife, in this second hut, was suffering from a cancer in her breast, which tormented her so greatly and had so wasted her that, seeing her in such a terrible condition without any medicine, we supposed she could not recover, and that, in all likelihood, she would live out the rest of her days in this state; for these people endure their pains and hardships very patiently, as we observed among all the Galibis. Therefore, we resolved to baptize her. To this end, Father Bechamel took care to instruct her, having already made some progress in the language of these people, and he also had the help of one of our young Nouragues, who understood the Galibis tongue. This poor sick woman received his instruction very well and was baptized, which brought us great comfort. On the eighth, having enough bread and paste of Ovicou to last us four days, we set out with our three Nouragues to travel twenty-four leagues over mountains the whole way, which the Nouragues sometimes complete in a day and a half, but usually in two or three days when women are with them. One of our Frenchmen from Cayenne, who had left there on the 27th of January, followed us closely with seven Galibis and caught up with us where we stayed the second night. He gave me a letter from the Reverend Father Brion, our superior, written the day he departed, which brought us much joy, for it contained a great deal of good advice that could be useful to us in our expedition. This Frenchman was very fatigued from his journey and sent his Indians ahead the next day, who in that one day, being the tenth of February, covered as much ground as we could in a day and a half, due to the difficulty of the paths. After joining our company and comparing our Nouragues with his Galibis, he noticed a great difference and could not help but admire the meekness and patience of these three Indians, especially their respect. They carried our provisions, yet did not dare take any without asking, even though we had often told them they could take what they pleased. That day we crossed the River Aratay, which flows into the Aproague. The Aratay is a fine river, coming from a country situated between the source of the River Uvia and the county of the Merciou, which the Nouragues say is a stretch of land about seven days' journey across. We were forced to cross this fairly wide and deep river, whose current is somewhat rapid, in a small canoe, at great risk of capsizing, as happened to the Frenchman who joined us when he crossed it again on his return, losing all he had with him. After this, we spent a third night in the woods, and on the eleventh of February, being very weary, we arrived around noon at the cottage of Imanon the Nourague, a famous Piaye (or physician) in all that

Country, where we found the Galibis who had advanced before us the previous day. These Galibis mutinied against this poor Frenchman, and were likely the reason the Nouragues of that place refused to sell him anything, so that his journey was wasted. He was even forced to ask one of our Nourague guides to carry part of his iron wares, which he had brought to trade, because the Galibis refused to help him. There was no remedy but patience, since he was eighty leagues from Cayenne, in a nation that had no commerce with the French. We parted from our three guides with regret, but could not keep them, as they were obliged to return for several good reasons. The principal of them, named Paratou, told us for our comfort that in the place where we now were, called Caraoribo after a small river nearby, we would find many Paratous—meaning many Nouragues—as good-natured as himself. But we found a great difference in the temperament of the guides we had from Caraoribo to the Acoquas compared to those we had before. As soon as these left us, we established a good relationship with the chief Camiati, father of Imanon, by presenting him with a hatchet. He is a very famous chief, the principal one among the Nouragues, and next in rank is the chief of the Nouragues of Uvia. This Camiati, the day after our arrival, came to his son's cottage (his own is on the River Aproague). He may be about sixty years old and still seems very vigorous. His face, though thin, has a warlike look, but he also has a savage aspect; his manner is rather indifferent toward strangers, though mild enough toward his own people, to whom, according to the custom of the country, he gives a daily greeting, both morning and night, from the oldest to children of fifteen years. He promised to guide us all the way to the Acquas when his canoe was finished, saying he would go himself and only needed ten days to complete it. Although we knew well how the Indians tend to count time—often taking three months to do what could be done in ten days—we decided to stay with him to benefit from his protection, and to persuade him, if he delayed too long, to borrow another canoe that was five days' journey from us. Meanwhile, we tried to learn the language of the Nouragues as much as possible, which we were told differed little from that of the Acouas and Merciou. The language of the Galibis, which some of us understood and which was very familiar to Father Bechamel, was helpful to us in this situation. The Nouragues' tongue is not as easy and soft in pronunciation as that of the Galibis, but has many words that must be pronounced with great

Rough aspirations, others of them cannot be pronounced without shutting the teeth; at another time one must speak through the nose; and sometimes these three difficulties all occur in the same word. Father Bechamel immediately began to apply himself to the study of this language; and I made so much use of his labor, in which he succeeded admirably, that by means of the Galibis language I made a small discourse on the creation of the world, to make these people know something of their Creator. Imanon, the master of this hut, was the first who took delight in hearing this discourse, and after him the chief himself; and five or six others, as they were working, would repeat in that very indistinct Galibis I could speak, these words: God made the heavens, God made the earth, etc. Here were many men who each had two wives, and one of them had three; this did not prevent me from telling them, in the account I gave them of the creation of mankind, that God made only one woman for the first man, and that he did not allow one man to have two wives. And though all these Nouragues perceived we condemned their custom of taking two or three wives at a time, yet they said not a word against the Christian law for not allowing the same liberty. Seeing these people so docile and pliable, I was willing to try if the songs of the Church would please them, and accordingly I sang the Magnificat in the first tune, Father Bechamel and our two servants joining in with me. This was so pleasing to them, that afterwards we usually sang some hymns three times a day to their great satisfaction. Indeed, some of them learned to answer to the litanies of the Blessed Virgin, which we sang every evening. Meanwhile, our chief's canoe went forward but very slowly, and we thought it much better to try to persuade him to borrow another, with which he complied, and sent two of his men for this purpose five days' journey from his house, to get a suitable one for us. It was the twenty-eighth of February when these men left us, and seeing him the next day, which was the first of March, send away another company of his men, we thought it convenient to use this occasion to engage some of them to carry our baggage, whom Father Bechamel accompanied, together with one of our servants, while I and our other servant remained with the chief, so that we might not offend him, because we stood in need of his protection. After I had continued a fortnight with him, making all the children say their prayers morning and evening, and repeating my little instructions to most of those I was acquainted with, but especially to three young men who were well married, confirming them in the resolution they had made never to take a second wife, of which promise they seemed to make no difficulty. I set forward the fifteenth of March, to seek Father Bechamel, and to wait for the chief of the cottage, who was to go by water five days after with his

I had only three leagues to travel by land, whereas it was nearly fifteen by water. From that time, I found the people even more receptive, and when the captain returned, among twenty-four people, there were no more than three who did not express great pleasure in my teachings. During our stay, a serpent entered at night where we slept and bit a hound, which died thirty hours later. This incident was unfortunate for us, because the chief and the owner of the dog blamed it on the prayers we sang; so I dared not sing anymore, but instead had everyone in the cottage say their prayers, except for three, namely the chief Camiati and two other old men. On the ninth of April, after I had repeatedly urged the chief that we might set out, he told us he was unwilling to make this journey, and that all his men would accompany us to set us on our way, leaving us when we went ashore to travel by land to the rivers leading to the Acouguas, where four of the company would attend us. We understood that their journey was decided without regard to us; nevertheless, we did not hesitate to pay them, being eager to take advantage of this opportunity, as it was not easy to find another. However, I opposed the plan of having so many men go with us, because the two canoes they had were too small for such a group. This was a great difficulty for us, and it was not resolved until the next day, when we explained to the chief that we would leave him our small chest, taking only a few of our things for the journey, and that when we returned, I would stay with him; that if he was not willing to help us, I must return to Cayenne, and then he should not expect to see us again or receive any more of our goods. This persuaded him to reduce the number of his men. On the tenth of March, we set out, sixteen in number, with the chief insisting on coming for three days to bring back his canoe. In the evening, we went ashore into the woods; and on the eleventh, after passing several waterfalls over two days, we arrived at a cottage of the Noiragues, ten leagues from the previous one. We were well received there and continued on the third day with a third canoe, which was very small and carried only two men, a woman, and a girl of ten or twelve years old. We passed two difficult falls and arrived at a third, which the canoe could not pass, so the Nouragues had made a path to drag their canoes by land for almost half a league. This fall is at two degrees and forty-six minutes northern latitude. The Indians dragged only the small canoe by land; for the chief left us and returned with the other two, and we, then fifteen in number, went to embark in a large canoe above the waterfall, which the two persons sent by Camiati—

had borrowed. Four leagues higher, we found the mouth of the River Tenaporibo and went to stay in a cottage nearby, which was still on the River Aproague. There we found five Nourague travelers who were going to the country of the Merciou. Among them was a woman with a little girl of seven or eight months old who was very ill. Imanon (whom I have mentioned before) was now the chief of our company; he is the greatest physician (that is, the greatest juggler) of the country. Though he is a great hypocrite and much given to having many wives, he did not hesitate to tell us that this child was very sick. When we had examined the matter, we judged it necessary to baptize her, which Father Bechamel did at the time when these travelers left us. I had previously baptized a little girl in the cottage of this Imanon immediately after she was born, because her mother, when she gave birth, had left her in the dirt, from which they would not pick her up for a long time. Being told of this disorder, and seeing that they would put nothing under the infant to protect her from the coldness of the mud and the night, I baptized her. On the fourteenth, we left this hut and soon entered the River Tenaporibo, which is very deep and rapid, though it winds a lot. We were not the first Frenchmen to have been on this river, and we were informed that three Englishmen were killed and eaten there some years ago by the Nouragues. It is very difficult to navigate this river, mainly because of its narrowness and because the large trees on its banks, when they fall, often stretch their branches to the other side, so that one must either pass over or under these trees, which is not done without much difficulty. We spent one night in the woods, and on the fifteenth arrived at a hut where we stayed. We left this hut on the twenty-seventh of April, towards evening, to go and find our guides, who were not far off. With them, we advanced by land and traveled only five leagues among very difficult mountains. On the twenty-ninth, we traveled about ten leagues, on a path a little more pleasant, and spent the night in the woods as before. Our three guides showed us two rivulets, which they said were Tenaporibo and Camopi, both very rapid; and five or six leagues beyond, Tenaporibo is forty feet wide and a full twelve in depth. At fifteen leagues distance, or a little more, the River Camopi is as large as the Seine below Paris, from which one may guess at the extent of its course. On the thirtieth, we went to lodge by the River Eriski, from where two of our Nouragues went to the Nouragues of the River Inipi to borrow a canoe and return to us, where we stayed, for the River Eriski flows into the Inipi. They did this for our convenience, as our journey had been very hard, considering our weakness. On the first of May, they returned to us with a rather handsome canoe, in which there were

Three Nouragues, who had never seen a Frenchman or any other European in their lives. Their appearance was very gentle, and they seemed to be of a very tractable disposition; after seeing us, they returned home, and we embarked in this canoe a little after noon, lodging that night in the woods by the River Inipi, where our guides repaired the canoe. The next day, being the second of May, we traveled down this river, which has a very rapid current, for about ten leagues, and entered the River Camopi, where we went four leagues further, this time against the current. For the Inipi loses its name and, joining with the Camopi, forms a great river that eventually joins the River Yapoque, five days' journey from there. The Camopi is very swift and has so many difficult rapids that it is not easy to count them; we ascended this river on the third and fourth of May, with much difficulty and danger. On the fourth of May, we slept on a flat rock, where we found part of a hut, whose roof our men repaired with branches. That day, we passed through a perilous place, not only because of a dangerous waterfall, but also because it was overlooked by a Nourague hut, the last of that nation, whose master is a Morou, the name of an Indian nation—one of whom had been hanged at Cayenne over a year ago for killing a Frenchman. We had reason to fear that he would, in the manner of the Indians, seek revenge for this man's death upon us; but one of our guides, who was also a Morou, had married his daughter, and we hoped that the presence of this young man, whom we then believed to be a Nourague, would calm his anger, as indeed it did. After we had settled on our flat rock, which is in the country of the Acouquas, we were greatly comforted to see our three guides ask for their supper by making the sign of the cross, where no one had ever done so before, and without needing any reminder. What increased our joy even more was that the youngest of our guides, who was about seventeen years old, after supper, of his own accord, sang in the church melody, 'Sancta Maria, ora pro nobis,' having been taught nothing more than that. I continued the litanies, and he responded to me. Towards evening, our principal guide gave a signal with a kind of pipe that could be heard at a great distance. The next day, the fifth of May, we had a very rainy morning, which prevented us from moving forward; but despite the rain, around nine o'clock in the morning, we saw three young Acouquas who had been sent to find out who we were. We went with them around noon, and about three o'clock arrived soon after them at the first hut of the Acouquas, which is at two degrees and twenty-five minutes north latitude. They were very pleased to see us, for it seems they had heard of our journey some time before. They became very familiar with us,

that in three days' time, there was not one among them who refused to pray to God; and every day we had them say their prayers morning and evening. On the second day, our first guide brought us to two other cottages nearby, where we were received with as much kindness as strangers could hope for from a savage people. Immediately, those living about a day's journey farther away heard of our arrival and came to see us. They all marveled at our hats, our cassocks, our shoes, and a gun, which we had our first guide fire from time to time before large gatherings of them; at the pictures in our breviaries, our writing, and the church songs, which they wished to hear many times each day. They listened to our teachings attentively and seemed to have very good feelings, and to be much moved when we told them that our own people were once ignorant of God, and that some good people had come to our nation to teach us that there is a God who would make us happy forever in heaven, and what we must do to reach that blessed place; and that we had come to do them the same good service, so that they might go to heaven as well. What gives me hope for the conversion of this nation is that they listened with reverence to those commandments of God that are most contrary to their old way of life. This leads me to speak more specifically about what I have observed in these two nations. The Nouragues and the Acouquas, in matters of religion, are the same as the Galibis. They acknowledge that there is a God, but do not worship him. They say he dwells in heaven, without knowing whether he is a spirit or not, but rather seem to believe he has a body. The Galibis call God Tamoucicabo, which means the Ancient of Heaven. The Nouragues and the Acouquas call him Maire, and never speak of him except in fables. They have many superstitions, which are only like the idle tales and foolishness of children, and I have never observed them practicing any idolatry. But I am very much afraid that their physicians, by their tricks, corrupt the women and girls, for I have good reason to think so. The natural disposition of the Nouragues and Acouquas is gentle; but the farther from the sea the Nouragues live, the more tractable they are, for frequent contact with the Indians on the coast makes them more unruly and difficult to deal with. It is certain that the Acouas are quite different from what the French at Cayenne think, who consider them fierce, cruel, treacherous, and perfidious to those they receive; for if one may judge by nearly two hundred of them whom we have seen, they are honest, friendly, cheerful people, very attentive and ready to listen. It is true, they recently exterminated a small nation and ate several of them; but I attribute

This barbarity should be attributed to the bad custom of the country, rather than to the disposition of the people; and this seems more probable because, being informed two or three days after our arrival that, half a day's journey from us, some of the flesh of a Magapa (the name of a people who are their enemies) whom they had recently killed, along with another, while they were watching for an opportunity to surprise one or another of the Acouas alone; and besides, one of the people of the cottage having set before us the jaw of a young man; we told them this was not right, and that God forbids us to kill an enemy when we take him prisoner, and to eat him afterwards. At this, they looked down very much without giving a word of reply. Another time, the master of one of the cottages, having heard that the Galibis, to prevent us from undertaking this voyage, had threatened that we would be roasted by the Acouas, was filled with great indignation at it, and could not be pacified until I told him I took those Galibis for liars and fools. Moreover, having told them I had been made a prisoner of war by the English and restored to the French without receiving any harm, and that God would not allow us to kill those we took in war, they seemed fairly well to approve of this law. And though this barbarous custom is a point so much established and received at all times among the Acouas, and among the Nouragues too, yet it seems, by what I have been relating, to be no difficult matter to restrain them from this savage practice of killing and eating their enemies. Polygamy is a second obstacle which we found against the Christian religion among these two nations of the Nouragues and Acouas; for where there is one man to be found who has only one wife, there are six who each have two or three. The hope that may be conceived for eradicating this vice is not concerning persons who are already engaged in this evil custom, but only those who have yet but one wife, and young men who are not yet married, who might be persuaded to be content with one wife. I confess, there is no hope of working upon the others. The way of living among the people of these two nations is very agreeable, and has something more courteous in it than that of the Galibis. For instance, among the Galibis, those who are married dine each one apart, and those who are unmarried eat all together; and all the women, maids, and little children go to another side of the hut to eat. The Nouragues and Acouas do quite otherwise, for the husband eats with his wife or wives and children with admirable agreement and union. They do not drink much, but are great eaters, and are always fishing or hunting, in which they spare no pains to get their living. They are all liars, as are all other Indians that we know. And when they perceive their lies are discovered, they retire, seeming to be a little ashamed, but will not fail to invent a lie again on the next occasion.

The Nouragues tried to frighten us with many stories of their own invention, hoping to change our minds about going to the Acouas, so that we would spend all our goods with them instead. Sometimes they claimed to have seen the tracks of some strange wild beast; other times, they said that the Caranes, their enemies, were roaming their woods, and that they had seen the footprints of three people from that nation not far from their hut. But when they saw that they could not scare us, they did as we wished. This vice leads them to promise much and deliver little, which is also caused by their lack of judgment in valuing things properly; this makes them indifferent to the harm they do by breaking their word, or to the dishonor they bring upon themselves by doing so. To fully understand how common this is among these two nations (and indeed among all the Indian nations we know), one must compare them to little children, who value things only by fancy. They are also prone to stealing, so they must sometimes be closely watched, or else they will pilfer one thing or another. The Nouragues number about six or seven hundred people; the Merciouxs, who live to their west, are equal in number. The Acouquas are to their south and concealed from us the strength of their nation; however, I suppose it may be three or four times greater than that of the Nouragues. When I asked an old woman how many cottages there were on one side, to which I pointed, she told us there were ten; then, pointing toward the area where their chief lived, she took a handful of her hair to signify to us the great number of cottages on that side. Between the Acouquas and the Mericous, they told us, is the nation of the Pirios, whom the Acouquas say are equal to themselves in strength. On the east and southeast are the Pirionaus, and on the east the Pirios and Magapas, and in the midst of all these nations are the Morous, who are very barbarous. All these nations speak the same language, which is understood by the Caranes, the enemies of the Nouragues. They also say that the Maranes, who are a very great people, understand the same tongue. To the south-southwest of the Acouquas are the Aramifas, whose language is similar to that of the Galibis, sharing many words, though they are not acquainted with that nation. The Acouquas say these Aramifas are a very great nation. If there is a Lake Parima, these people cannot be forty leagues from it on the north side. We could get no information about this lake. Not one Indian, when we asked whether they knew of a vast body of water like the sea, the sand of which is Caracoli (for so they call gold, silver, and copper), could give me the least information about it. These Aramissas are in the same longitude, wherein the

Maps place the eastern part of Lake Parima. After we had stayed with the Acouquas for twelve or thirteen days, the air became unhealthy due to excessive heat, at a time when there was very little wind; which rarely fails to blow in those countries, and indeed, it is what makes them habitable. Father Bechamel was struck with a tertian fever, and even the strongest of our servants became very ill. We therefore urged our guides to return, since they were unwilling to lead us any farther, nor would they allow the Acouquas to fetch their chief, who lived three days’ journey from where we were, with whom we wished to form an alliance. These three guides became insolent, supposing that it was to honor them that the Acouquas had gathered in such great numbers; though it seemed more likely that curiosity to see us Frenchmen had brought them together. They became very troublesome, especially the Morou, who showed clear signs of his wicked nature, persuading the Acouquas that we ought to leave them all our goods. These unreasonable demands did not much surprise us; but to give them hope of our return, we left an iron tool worth half a crown with one of them, who had only one wife, on the condition that I should receive a large hammock when I returned; promising that I would then give him a bill and a knife to make up the value. I chose this man on purpose to show my respect for lawful marriage; and he understood me well, promising that he would not take a second wife during the life of the one he already had, with whom he had lived at least eight or nine years, as they had a daughter about seven years old. However, this arrangement made our return easier. On the 25th of May, we embarked on the River Camopi in two canoes; Father Bechamel was in the smaller one, with our principal Nourague and an Acouquas who wished to go with us to Cayenne; I went in the other with our two servants, the Morou, and the young Nourague, who, not steering the vessel properly, let it drift so close to the edge of a great waterfall that those in the other canoe cried out, believing we would be lost. But these two young men, with great effort, brought our canoe under a rock that broke the force of the current, and climbing onto the rock, managed to pull the canoe out of danger. It is much more dangerous to go down these falls than to go up them; for in ascending, they choose places where the water runs less violently to haul the canoe up by main strength, whereas in descending, they take the swiftest part of the stream, so that one risks one's life more than can easily be described. After passing these dangers, on the second day after we embarked, our young Norague, who had never faced such risk before, said in his own language, 'God is good, and is not angry with us.'

Place where we were to go by land, between the River Inipi and Tenaporibo, our guides, who were well loaded with hammocks and other things they had bought from the Acoquas, were not willing to help us, which they would have done if that Moron had not put them out of humor. They walked very fast, as the Indians are accustomed to do when they are loaded, and at last left us five leagues from Tenaporibo; but by the goodness of God we got through without losing our way, by following a path in which these Indians had thrown little branches in several places where it was not easy to discern the track, to show which way they went. When we came within three quarters of a league of the first cottages, we heard some Nouragues calling to us, who brought us cassava and fish to eat, and some ovicou to drink. On the first day of June our young Morou, being drunk, treated us very badly, which made us resolve to return to Cayenne in another canoe, and in the company of other Indians, especially because our illnesses increased. I had a violent fever and a great cough, and Father Bechamel was very ill, as well as the strongest of our servants. And now, as we needed the special assistance of Providence to find a way to return, it pleased God to show us how particular a care he took of our preservation, providing us with what we needed—not indeed at the time we wished, nor in the manner we thought best, but in such a season and in such a way as was most convenient for us, until at length we arrived at Cayenne. On the second day of June we made an agreement with the first Nourague, who had helped us at Caraotibo, three leagues from Aproague, who was of a very good temper and had come there with two other Nouragues from the same place, who were kindly disposed toward us and were willing to return home as soon as they could. We decided to set out the next day, to prevent our Morou and our other guides, who were elsewhere, from opposing our plan. We were to go three leagues by land or seven by water to reach this man's canoe; but I was so ill I could not go by land, and our servant was as bad as I, so we were forced to seek a canoe to go by water. By God's providence, we found a small one, which we hired, that was sunk in the water but was big enough to carry four of us: namely, the Indian and his wife, our servant, and myself. Father Bechamel, though very weak, had the courage to undertake the journey on foot with our other servant. We wished to go forward the next day from the place where this Nourague's canoe lay, but we would not have been able to endure the fatigue. It pleased God to provide for our welfare on this occasion, permitting the Indians to detain us eleven days in this place, where there were nearly sixty people. The chief of them, who had a son in the neighborhood of Cayenne, placed us in a cottage by ourselves, that we might not be

disturbed by the noise of a great celebration they were preparing, and ordered his wife to treat us as well as she could. This was partly due to his good humor, and partly to ensure his son would not receive any ill treatment from the French at Cayenne. God was pleased, during our stay, to give us another opportunity to instruct a woman who was almost consumed by cancers, so that she was eventually baptized by Father Bechamel the day before we left. This Father was so weak that he could not recite his breviary while walking; yet the next day, he was strong enough to walk nearly a league from there to embark. Only one difficulty remained, since we were in the hands of three very honest Nouragues: how to leave Caniati's cottage with our small chest containing all our goods, and to find a suitable passage to the mouth of the Aproague. I had promised Caniati to stay with him after my return from the Acouas, and these people are not pleased when they see us carrying our belongings out of their cottages; so we had reason to fear he would keep us with him for at least two months before taking us to Lake Parima. But God removed all these obstacles; our three Nouragues promised to take us to the sea, on the condition that we would give them a fair reward. As we passed by Caniati’s cottage, we found he was out hunting, and those present were only his two wives and some strangers, who did not dare prevent us from taking our small chest and our three guides. Though they were afraid to displease Caniati their chief, they did not know how to refuse to lead us to a cottage a league further down, which was then uninhabited, and where they were to go in order to travel by land to Caratibo, where they lived, to bring their wives there, and then return to us; though they would have preferred to leave us at Caniati’s house. When we arrived at the empty cottage, I felt so ill that I thought I would die; but after recovering somewhat, and noticing that the master of the canoe wished to speak with Caniati, and that one of our servants wanted to go with him to fetch a hound he had bought that had run away there, I gave him an iron tool worth half a crown to present to Caniati from me, asking him to order his wives to prepare me a hammock, and to tell him I would pay the rest upon my return, as soon as I had recovered my health. I did this to prevent him from harming our servant, and so he would not oppose our plan to leave. The master of the canoe told Caniati about the insult the young Morou gave us, and about my poor health, so well that when he received the present I sent, he insisted on accompanying me to

the mouth of the Apreague, to the cottage of the chief of the Sapayes, whom he had wished to visit for a long time, being his very good friend. He came accordingly the next day with one of his sons, who was about thirty years of age, and his two wives, and sent home two of our guides, taking their places. He sent the woman and one of our servants one league by land. Our other servant remained in the canoe to row, or, to use the term of the country, to pagay, with these three strong Nouragues; we also remained in the canoe, because our weakness would not allow us to go this league by land. They lightened the canoe in this way, so that they might better pass a fall of the river, which was so rough and difficult that the Indians could not help but turn pale at the extreme danger we were in. On one occasion, among others, they worked so hard to keep the canoe from being carried down a precipice of water that, when they managed to get under a rock that broke the violence of the stream, they were forced to rest for nearly fifteen minutes, being so exhausted they could scarcely catch their breath. I have twice been very nearly shipwrecked at sea, but the sight of this river fall was more dreadful to me than anything I ever saw at sea. On the nineteenth of June we passed down two of these falls; at the first, they sent the women away by land and crossed the river to ask a Galibi, who had recently come there to build a new cottage, what course they should take to avoid being overturned, because the bed of the river sloped, giving the stream extraordinary speed; and besides, there were many rocks under water, against which we might be dashed and so lost. Seeing our men were greatly troubled in mind about it, despite all the directions this man gave them, we asked him to guide us through this difficult passage, promising him a fishing-hook for his trouble, which he willingly undertook and successfully accomplished. At the second, which was the last we met with on the Aproague, we all went ashore and walked along the riverside over very uneven rocks, and the Nouragues held the canoe by a line tied behind it, letting it go gently down this place, which is very dangerous at low water, for the rising tide covers it, though it is twenty leagues up the river. After we had passed these many difficulties by the mercy of God, we at last had no cassava left, no meat or fish, nor ovicou, when we were still a day and a half's journey from the cottage of the Sapayes. But God in his goodness was pleased to provide for our great necessity; for as we traveled along the river we saw a dog barking, upon which the Nouragues called out to see if anyone was hunting, and soon, to their great joy, saw it was their good friend, the chief of the Sapayes, who came to us and greeted us all with demonstrations of

Friendship. We did what the Nouragues would not dare to do, that is, we asked him to sell us some provisions, telling him that neither we nor the Nouragues had any left. When he understood our necessity, he sent for his canoe, which was large and well stocked with cassava, ovicou, meat, and fish, which he provided for us and the Nouragues, and we paid him immediately. He told us his lodging was a league away, where he would meet us in the evening, and that since his small half-covered hut had room only for him and his men, we would need to make another for ourselves. He came as promised toward night, and the next day he had Father Bechamel and me go into his canoe, as he thought the Nouragues' canoe was overloaded. On the 21st, we arrived at the cottage of this chief of the Sapayes, where we were kindly received. As soon as we arrived, we began to consider how we might get from there to Cayenne; and we could think of no better way than to persuade the chief of the Sapayes to take us himself, which would have taken three weeks and been very costly for us. But the providence of God had made provision for us, for the next day we learned that a chief of the Galibis would come the following day to take a Sapaye with him to Cayenne, and from there to Maroni, to fetch his son, who had been there with the Sapayes for two years, as had the son of the chief of the Sapayes. He agreed to take us in his canoe for a small fee, and we went to lodge at a small island in the river, some distance from the sea; here we stayed on the twenty-fourth of June. I observed that the sea rose here eight feet high, and concluded from this, since it covers the last fall of the river, that the river declines only eight feet over twenty-five leagues from the sea. At night, they heard the cry of a bird and said to each other in the Galibis language, 'Listen how the Devil cries.' I reproved them, telling them they were mistaken, and that the Devil has no body, but is a spirit as our souls are, which they admit are invisible and immortal; yet they do not say this of devils, but claim that their physicians, or piaies, kill them with great clubs. The Nouragues of one cottage made the figure of a man on the path by which they thought the Devil came to their cottage at night to make them sick; so that while he stopped at this phantom, thinking it a Nourague, the piaies who watched for him might seize the opportunity, when they saw him, to strike him on the head. We left this island to go and lodge at Co, from where the next day we saw many canoes of the Galibis at sea, heading toward the River of Amazons. The master of our canoe and the Sapaye went to visit them, dragging their canoes over the mud at low tide, and found in one of them the

Two young men were going to seek for us at Maroui. They now had nothing to do but to carry us to Cayenne; and because the sea was so rough that they could not well bear up against it, we asked them to set us ashore at Mahuti, the first place we could land at on the island of Cayenne, which they managed with a great deal of effort. As soon as I set my foot upon the sand, I fell down on my knees to thank God for the protection he had granted us for one hundred and seventy leagues since we left the country of the Acoquas, for our whole voyage was two hundred and forty leagues. We went to lodge at the house of Monsieur Fontain, whose estate lies in this part of the island, and he received us with great joy. The next day, being the twenty-seventh, Father Bechet came to fetch us with two horses, and we borrowed another from Monsieur Fontaine, and so arrived at the fort of Cayenne, where the governor was pleased to treat us with all imaginable friendship. All the people came to see us and to show the great affection they had for us. In three months, I hope by the grace of God to visit the marshes of the Aracarets, the Palicoms, the Mayes, the Marones, and the Conflades, whose habitations stand more thickly and closely together than those I have described in this account. Here is a great field opened to the Gospel laborers, into which I am ready to conduct those who are willing to devote themselves to it, as well as to reveal to them many other nations: being fully resolved, by the grace of God, to risk my life for so glorious a purpose as the propagation of the Gospel and the conversion of so many people.

Notes upon the travels of Father John Grillet and Father Francis Bechamel, Jesuits, into Guiana.

Note (1) in the letter: A fort which the Dutch took from the English fourteen or fifteen years ago, on which the English colony depends, which is quite numerous and was established there eight or ten years before under the command of Lord Willoughby. This fort was built by the French in 1644; they abandoned it in 1646 for reasons reported in various accounts.

Note (2) p. 3: This river discharges itself into the sea on the east side of Cayenne.

Note (3) ibid.: Of Ouicon they make a sort of drink with the consistency and color of milk, by steeping it in water; it will keep a month or six weeks in a kind of baskets lined with the leaves of banana trees, which are four or five feet long and more than two feet wide.

Note (4) ibid.: The brother of the Marquis de la Barre, who was formerly governor and the king’s lieutenant general in the American islands, both by sea and land, and is now a captain of one of his Majesty’s ships.

Note (5) p. 4: The mouth of this river is fourteen leagues eastward from Cayenne.

Note (6) p. 5: This is one of the nations that fled into the country of the Galibis.

Note (7) ibid.: In these huts or cottages the Indians hang their hammocks or cotton beds.

When the sun sets, they rest for the night. They usually rise with the sun, and then their wives take down their beds and hammocks and hang them in the carbet, which is their kind of hall or outbuilding. The posts of the carbet not only support the roof, which is made of palm leaves, but also serve to hang all the beds of the men and boys in the family, as well as those of guests when they are entertained. This carbet is placed ten or twelve paces above the cottage, in which the women always leave their own beds. At one end of the cottage, they usually make cassava bread and their drink, ouicou; this part serves as the kitchen and for all the work necessary for the family's subsistence. Some of these cottages have a loft above to hang their beds at night; then the lower part of the hut serves as the carbet, where the men spend the day (when at home) making their bows and arrows and other necessities. Their work differs from that of the women, as in most other places. However, there is one thing belonging to the other sex that the men have taken over, which deserves special mention, though I will only briefly mention it here. When their wives give birth, the men go to bed and receive congratulations for the delivery as if they had endured the pain themselves, and respond to visitors as women do in similar situations elsewhere. This custom is not unique to the Galibis but is practiced by many other nations in Brazil and other parts of America. It should also be noted that their carbets are the places where they hold consultations and deliberate on important matters, usually with great solemnity, with those concerned and invited assembling from various places for this purpose.

They use wood to cure diseases and wounds, and have a method of sucking the affected part of the patient's body where the pain is felt; this practice is usually very successful. The reason they spend so much time making their canoes is that, after selecting and felling a tree, and hollowing it with a hatchet to about half a foot in width and depth along its length, they finish hollowing it with a gentle fire. This process is slow and depends on the size of the timber and the intended length of the canoe. Although tedious, this method makes the canoes very durable, so they rarely rot, as worms never touch them, partly due to the hardness of the wood, which is a common quality of trees between the tropics. The goods that are traded among these nations include hatchets, bills, knives, looking-glasses, hooks, and similar items. It is the custom of this nation to treat their children in this manner. In 1625, the English tried to settle at Cayenne, and those three who were devoured by the Indians were probably among them, as their settlement failed due to poor relations with the natives. Their main plantation was at Cayenne, on the River Remire. The Dutch suffered the same disappointment some years later. The stern of large canoes is usually joined to the rest and caulked with a kind of fatty earth, which the water soon washes away, so they must renew it from time to time; this is called mending or refitting a canoe. The mouth of this river enters the Amazon and the River of Cayenne, about twenty leagues from the Aproague; it was from here that Monsieur Iecy, the Governor of Cayenne, with ten men, drove away six or seven hundred Dutch during the last wars, even though they had a fort with some cannons. At the same time, the Dutch were twice driven from the River Aproague, where they also had a fort defended with cannons. Tamouci or Tamechi means 'old,' and Cabo means 'heaven' in the Galibian language. When the English came from Barbados with four or five frigates to attack Cayenne in 1666, Father Grillet was Superior of the Jesuits there and spent some time among the English, who left him with the rest of the colony when they departed. It is true that they drink little or nothing during ordinary meals until they have finished eating, and then usually take one drink; but when they gather for warlike enterprises, to begin or launch a canoe, and when they make a

Chief, or admit him into their Council, after they have exposed him to several rough kinds of trials; they have extraordinary celebrations, which often last three or four days, continuing until they have drunk all their liquor—what the French call 'faire un vin.' For these occasions, they make three or four different kinds of drink, some of which become very strong through fermentation, such as the one they call Palinot, made with cassava that is baked more than usual. The pieces are stacked while very hot and kept that way until they begin to mold, after which they are mixed with potatoes, cut into small pieces like the cassava, and placed in large earthen jars. A suitable amount of water is poured over them, and the mixture is left to ferment together until the liquor is as strong as desired, which is after about five or six days of fermentation. They strain it before use, and then it has the color and consistency of beer, with a much better taste, but is much more potent and intoxicating. They also have many other kinds of drink, the variety depending on the different fruits used. But the one they usually drink is as white as milk and of the same consistency. It is very refreshing and nourishing, made from cassava baked in the usual way and potatoes boiled with it until they form a paste. This is put into baskets lined with banana leaves, where it keeps for a month before it begins to sour, though it lasts longer if kept cool. When they use it, they soak as much as needed in water, and if they have time, they strain it; but often they just soak it and drink it unstrained. If sugar or crushed sugarcane is mixed in, it closely resembles the taste, color, and consistency of orgeat, which the French adopted from the Italians some years ago. This drink is called Ouvacou on the continent and Ovicou in the islands. It is believed that Europeans can never make it as well as the Indians because the Indians chew the potatoes and cassava before boiling them together and know better how much boiling is needed to perfect the liquor. However, seeing this method of preparation is more off-putting than reading about it; and the wine that washes the dirty feet of grape gatherers as they tread the grapes is no less unpleasant, but fermentation in both cases corrects this impurity. Note (20) P. 30. This is their common way of expressing things they cannot count, saying Enoura, which means 'thus much.' Note (21) P. 31. This nation is situated toward the source of the Maroni River, the mouth of which is about fifty leagues west of Cayenne, and thirty from the

River Surinam; where the Dutch have a fort, which the French built in the year 1644, and were obliged to abandon in 1646 for lack of support from France. This fort is three leagues from the mouth of the Surinam, on the right-hand side as you enter. Lord Willoughby withdrew there in 1648 or 1649 with a colony of one thousand or twelve hundred English, who tried to support the interest of the King of England against Cromwell, in the Barbadoes; that is, those of the Antilles, or Antigua Islands, which the English possess; for the English call all those islands the Barbadoes, just as the French call all the Antilles they possess St. Christopher’s Islands. Note (22) There are several kinds of tools suitable for the Indians, valued at about half a crown, two shillings, twenty pence, fifteen pence, etc., such as hatchets or axes, bills with wooden handles, others with iron handles, into the socket of which they may be fixed or removed at will; and small planing-axes like those used by coopers. This tool serves the Indians in making their canoes, especially in hollowing out the inside of the tree they intend for that purpose. They also use planes to smooth the outside of the canoes, as well as for other work. Note (23) A hammock is an Indian bed made of cotton; though they all hang them up by the two ends when they wish to lie in them, sometimes between two trees ten or twelve feet apart, and sometimes between two of the posts that support their houses or their shelters; yet they differ greatly in both material and workmanship. For example, all the hammocks made from the River of Amazons to the Orinoco are of cotton, made full, and almost all without fringe on the sides; most of them are colored with rocon, or red paint, patterned in flourishes made with good proportion and exactness; these are most valued for use, especially in the islands, because they last a long time and are stronger than those of Brazil, which are so thin one can generally see through them, and are made of twined cotton, much finer than those of Guiana, which are also made of twisted shuttle, which they pass through the threads to weave it as we do cloth. But because they pass their shuttle through thread by thread, one above and one below, this work is extremely tedious and requires no less patience than theirs. Those of Brazil, having much more work about them, require more time and industry to make; but both kinds are much bought in the islands, where almost all Europeans use them; and they are very good to use in Europe, especially in places where the beds are poor and unclean, particularly Spain and Italy, where one might carry them without much trouble, as they are very light; for the largest do not weigh more than five or six pounds, and those of Brazil not above half as much, because they are thin and fine; with two pegs or two large nails they may be hung up anywhere.

Houses are built at a convenient distance from one another for this purpose. They do not travel far into the country without these beds, and there are always enough left in their houses for strangers. This type of bed is also used throughout almost all of southern America to carry wounded or sick people; those used for this purpose have a large ring at each end, through which a pole of sufficient length and strength is inserted to support a man's weight. In this way, two Indians, one in front and one behind, carry the sick man, supported in his hammock by the pole resting on their shoulders. The Arouagues, the Araotes, and most of the other nations near the River Orinoco make their beds from the thread of pite, woven in a net-like fashion, which they hang up in the same way others hang their cotton hammocks. Pite is a kind of hemp or flax, but much longer and whiter; from this they make cords for the rigging of the masts and sails of their canoes, as well as for other uses. This pite is also much lighter and stronger than hemp, and far less likely to rot in water; they make very fine thread from it to mend their arrows and for similar purposes. Perhaps it is the Aloe Yucca with leaves, as described in the Catalogue of Jamaican Plants, page 118. Boucanee means meat dried without being salted, on a kind of grate made of sticks placed about three feet above the fire. They boucanee meat as well as fish; and the word 'Boucaniers' comes from this, because they usually lived on meat or fish prepared in this way. This name was given to the French in the island of St. Domingo because, before they had houses as they do now in the western part of the island, they lived only on beef prepared in this manner and sold the hides of the bulls and cows they killed to ship captains in exchange for guns, powder and shot, shirts, and drawers, which was all their equipment. They were then vagabonds on the island and had no houses, but now they are settled there and plant a great deal of tobacco in spite of the Spaniards. They are under the command of the governor of La Tortue, a small island near St. Domingo on the west side. It is supposed that the number of these Boucaniers surpasses that of all the other French in the American islands called the Antilles. These Boucaniers have performed such astonishing exploits against the Spaniards at Porto Velo, at Panama, in New Spain, and elsewhere, that the accounts we hear about them are almost incredible, except that a Spaniard has recently taken care to immortalize their memory, having written in his own language the history of various expeditions of these adventurers in a quarto volume printed at Cologne in 1681, with illustrations. A relation of Guiana, and of the commerce that may be settled there. Guiana is a great country on the continent of northern America, which extends in latitude from the equinoctial line to the tenth degree toward the Arctic Pole, and in

Longitude from the River of Amazons to the Orinoco, which covers nearly four hundred leagues along the sea-coast, with an immense stretch into the countries bordering Brazil to the south, and New Andalusia to the west. Our French seamen are accustomed to call Guiana the North Cape, because that is the most notable cape on that coast; and those who have business in those parts commonly land there to gain some knowledge of the country. This cape lies between 2 and 3 degrees north latitude, and between 345 and 346 degrees longitude. This part of the continent is watered by many rivers, some of which can carry large vessels a considerable distance beyond their mouths; and along their shores, an infinite number of plantations could be established, which would be very profitable, both in terms of trade with the natives and the fishing trade that could be carried on in these rivers and along the sea-coast, as well as from the labor and industry of the planters. The various settlements the French have made there at different times sufficiently prove the possibility of living in good relations with the Indians, provided they are treated civilly and with more honesty and sincerity than those who have so far managed these enterprises, when they fall into their hands. The poor treatment the natives have received from them, for which they have sometimes taken revenge, has not made them irreconcilable, as experience has shown us on different occasions. They are reasonably endowed with good sense, which they have the opportunity to cultivate and refine through many years of experience, as they often live to a great age: for they consider a man to die young if he does not live beyond 100 years. They have good judgment and rational thoughts about things within their experience and the reach of natural reason, with which alone they are equipped. They keep their word with great exactness, and strictly practice the maxim of not doing to others what they would not want done to themselves. They are more inclined to peace than war, which they only engage in when they have a just cause, or when revenge or honor prompts them. They are sufficiently industrious, and although they have patience and skill in fishing and hunting, they are prudent enough not to let their subsistence depend on chance; therefore, they willingly cultivate their land according to their needs and the size of their families. Before Europe provided them with iron and steel tools for this purpose, they made some from hard stones; but besides the intolerable labor of making them, the effort required to use them was so great that they abandoned the

use of them as soon as they found they could do more work in a day with our hatchets, bills, and knives than they could do in six months with their stone tools; which now are good for nothing but to be kept in the cabinets of the curious, as so many proofs of the remarkable patience of those people. They speak a language which is not only understood by all the nations whom the Spaniards on one side and the Portuguese on the other have forced to retreat into Guiana, but is also intelligible to the Caribs, who are the natives of the Antilles and use this language. I have learned this from the Indians of the islands of St. Vincent, St. Domingo, and others where I had occasion to converse with them. In short, this language is spoken for more than four hundred leagues along the seacoasts, and in many places over one hundred and twenty leagues inland. They raise all sorts of domestic fowl, which they exchange with us for trinkets, as well as wild fowl and other game, which are very plentiful there; also an abundance of both sea and freshwater fish. They build us houses in their fashion, which are comfortable enough for the country; they clear our land and carry our letters, they help load and unload merchant ships; and in short, there is hardly any kind of service that cannot be obtained from them by treating them courteously and giving them a few trifles of small value when they need them. They even undertake to load ships entirely with a kind of fish, which they catch in the rivers with a sort of harpoon; and they do this on such reasonable terms that those who trade in this way always find extraordinary profit in it, because the sale of these fish is always quick and certain in the islands, where there is great demand for them. Thus, one may say that this kind of fish and the sea turtle are the codfish of the continent and the Antilles. And it is the manna upon which the colonies between the tropics live, as much as many Europeans and others do upon codfish. This fishing trade is practiced all year in most of the rivers on this coast, except for turtle fishing, which lasts only three or four months in the year; during which the females come to lay their eggs in the sand, beyond the marks left by the highest tides, and in such great abundance (especially on the shores least frequented) as can hardly be imagined: for ten men can turn as many of them in a night as one hundred can process in a week. At night, which is the only time they come to lay their eggs, they wait until the turtles have passed the bounds marked by the highest tides, and then turn them on their backs; and once in this position, they cannot recover themselves to return to the sea. Among the plants which the Indians cultivate in their plantations, cotton is one of those that chiefly occupies them, especially the women who make

This is their particular business; and thus they find means to adorn themselves, for they know how to spin it as finely as can be desired. And if the disorders that have happened in the Colonies on the Continent had not hindered the establishment of a regular trade in it, which might have been easily accomplished—if it had not been for this, all Europe might have been supplied with it, in every manner in which it could have been used, without costing the French any more trouble or expense, in effect, than simply receiving it. This is due to the natural and general inclination the Indians have both for work and for finery, valuing a grain of crystal to hang about their neck or at their ears as much as we would value a diamond of the same size. Besides, it is well known that cotton is one of the commodities most consumed in Europe, and its price is among the least variable. The inhabitants of the islands would never have stopped cultivating it, if there had been enough women to spin it, without which it cannot be transported except with great difficulty and little profit. The hammocks or cotton beds which the Indians sell us for a bill or hatchet are afterwards sold in the islands at considerable profit; everyone there has one, and none are brought from any country other than Guiana, except from Brazil, and that but rarely, because of the limited trade the French have there. Their rocou is a red dye, and valuable when it is natural, such as the Indians sell us, before it has been adulterated by foreigners who carry it into Europe. There are also to be found among them various sorts of gums, woods, and roots suitable for medicine, which are good commodities in France, as well as several types of wood suitable for dyeing and for making cabinets and inlaid works, among which is the letter-wood, which the French call Bois de la Chine, and which grows in no other place in the world but this part of the continent. The natives cut it and carry it in great loads right to the ships so cheaply that a thousand pounds of it costs only a crown, whereas that quantity was for a long time sold for a hundred crowns, and never for less than 150 livres. Besides those animals that are fit for sport, such as apes of various kinds, sapajous, tamarins, sagouins, parrots, macaws, and toucans—I omit many other things which this country produces. One may say that this large expanse of land has, moreover, this advantage over the islands of America: there is no fear of exhausting it, as we are taught by experience with the island of St. Christopher and others, which have in a short time become almost barren, merely by being overburdened with continual crops, because the land can never be allowed to rest, due to the small portion of ground each inhabitant possesses; which yet does not prevent them from raising every year a prodigious quantity

of sugar, besides ginger, indigo, cassia, and other commodities that are cultivated and produced there. This country of Guiana is varied with hills, plains, and meadows; and there are hardly any mountains that would not be profitable if they were cultivated. The land is everywhere so fertile that one man may easily earn, with his own hands, a livelihood for twenty people, the cultivation being so very easy. The fruits are excellent and very plentiful, and all our kinds of grain grow there all year round, without distinction of seasons, and that in a very short time. And since there is no winter, the trees are alternately covered with blossoms and fruit, and always with leaves. The air is very good, and the climate very temperate, though it is between the tropics; for the heat is continually moderated by a fresh east wind, which blows all year, except at night, when breezes come from the land, which are only felt one or two leagues toward the sea. The waters are excellent, and remain good throughout the longest voyages, as has often been experienced in Europe, where they are never found to stink upon arrival. This account being drawn up only as a succinct memoir of Guiana in general, and of Cayenne in particular, I thought it not proper to extend it further, nor to give the details of a country where the French now have a colony, from which more ample information may be expected. THE END.

